The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Undercurrent
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Undercurrent

Author: Robert Grant

Illustrator: F. C. Yohn


        
Release date: January 4, 2018 [eBook #56310]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/56310

Credits: Produced by Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNDERCURRENT ***

[Frontispiece: Her lover was beside her and was suggesting that he
escort her home.]




  THE
  UNDERCURRENT

  BY

  ROBERT GRANT


  WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY

  _F. C. Yohn_


  CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
  NEW YORK :::::::::::::: 1904




  COPYRIGHT, 1904, BY
  CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

  Published, October, 1904




  TO MY WIFE




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Her lover was beside her and was suggesting that he escort her home . .
. . . . _Frontispiece_

"I have missed you two young people at church lately"

"Oh, Emil, my husband, how could you!" she moaned

"Give it to me, Paul," demanded the young woman imperiously

"I am sure that this woman will tell me her story"

There were moments, even from the first, when he let her perceive that
he regarded her as a social companion

Constance would find her in possession at Lincoln Chambers

"I should like to marry because I am in love"

"Refuse a man like that who's crazy to marry you!"

The flowers were the bright, shining milestone

"I have surrendered"




THE UNDERCURRENT


"Those whom God has joined together let no man put asunder."  It seemed
to the bride that the Rev. George Prentiss laid especially solemn
stress on these words, and as she listened to the announcement that,
forasmuch as Emil Stuart and Constance Forbes had consented together in
holy matrimony, he pronounced them to be man and wife, her nerves
quivered with satisfaction at the thought that she was Emil's forever.
The deed was done, and she was joyous that the doubt which had harassed
her in her weak moments--whether she was ready to renounce her ambition
to help in the great work of education for the sake of any man--was
solved and merged in the ocean of their love.  Doubtless Emil was not
perfect, but she adored him.  No one had even hinted that he was not
perfect, but she had made up her mind not to be ridiculous in her
rapture, and to look the probable truth squarely in the face as became
an intelligent woman.  She knew that until recently he had been only a
clerk with Toler & Company, lumber merchants, and that he had just
started in business on his own account.  He was dependent for support
on his individual labors, but she had in her own name the nice little
nest-egg of five thousand dollars, realized from the sale of the family
homestead at Colton, the country town, ten miles distant, from which,
an orphan, she had come to Benham a year previous.  She was marrying
for love a young man who had his own way to make, just as hundreds of
others were doing every day, and she was proud of her part in the
compact.  A great happiness had come into her life, almost against her
will, but now that it had come she recognized that it was nature
working in the ordinary way, and that she would not remain single for
all the kindergartens in creation.  She had known Emil only a year;
still that year had been one of courtship, and no one had ever spoken
ill of him, though she had been told that Mr. Prentiss, as a rector
charged with overseeing the destinies of friendless girls who were
members of his parish, had made inquiries.  Moreover, Mr. Prentiss had
agreed that two young people, situated as they were, whose hearts were
united, did well to marry on a small income and trust somewhat to the
future.  How otherwise, as he sagely remarked, was ideal love to
flourish, and were mercenary considerations to be kept at bay?  Emil
was twenty-five, and she just twenty.  Youthful, but still of a proper
age, and they were growing older every day.  Decidedly it was a prudent
love-match, and she had a right to be joyful, for there was nothing to
reproach herself with or to regret.

It will thus be observed that Constance Forbes was no happy-go-lucky
sort of girl, and that though she was marrying younger than she had
expected, she was marrying with her eyes open.  She had scrutinized
severely the romantic episode which had made her and her lover
acquainted, and had even refused him the first time he asked her in
order to counterbalance the glamour resulting from that meeting.  The
episode was a sequel to an accident to the train on which she was
travelling from Colton to Benham.  The engine ran into the rear of some
freight cars, owing to a misplaced switch, and the tracks were strewed
with splintered merchandise, so that the train was delayed four hours.
The natural thing for passengers with time to kill was to inspect the
wreckage, which, besides the dilapidated railroad apparatus, consisted
of mangled chairs and tables, and bursted bags of grain, a medley of
freight impressive in its disorder.  Constance found herself presently
discussing with a young man the injuries to the cow-catcher of the
engine, which had been twisted ludicrously awry.  A moment before two
other persons, one of them a woman, had been on the spot, and the
conversation had been innocuously general, but they had drifted off.
Constance was conscious of having noticed the young man in her car, and
of having casually observed that he had an alert expression, and that
his hair rose perpendicularly from his brow, suggesting the
assertiveness of a king-bird.  To allow a young man to scrape
acquaintance with her in cold blood would ordinarily have been entirely
repugnant to her ideas of maidenly propriety, but she resisted her
first impulse to turn her back on him and abruptly close the interview
as needlessly harsh.  It would surely be prudish to abstain from
examining the battered locomotive, which lay on one side, with its nose
in the air, as though it had fallen in the act of rearing, merely
because a respectable-looking male passenger happened to be equally
interested in the results of the catastrophe.  So it chanced that after
they had exchanged observations concerning the injuries to the
overthrown "Vulcan" and speculated as to how long they were likely to
be delayed, their conversation became less impersonal.  That is, the
young man informed her that he was in the employ of Toler & Company,
lumber merchants, and was returning to Benham after having made some
collections for them in the neighboring country.  Then he was familiar
with Benham?  Familiar?  He should say so.  He had been settled there
for three years, and--(so he gave Constance to understand)--there was
absolutely nothing regarding the place which he could not tell her.
First of all, Benham was a growing, thriving city.  Its population had
quadrupled in fifteen years.  Think of that!  So that now (in 1886)
there were upward of three hundred and fifty thousand souls in the
city's limits.  It was a hustling place.  A shrewd, energetic man, who
kept his wits active, ought to make his fortune there in ten years, if
he were given a proper chance.  Was she going to live in Benham?

Constance admitted that she was, and, helped along by friendly
inquiries, she told him briefly her story.  That she had lost her
father and mother within a few months of each other, and that she had
decided to come to Benham, of which, of course, she had heard as a
progressive city, in order to learn the kindergarten methods of
teaching.  Subsequently she hoped to obtain an appointment as a
school-teacher, and so earn her own living.

"When you've finished your lessons and are ready to teach, let me know.
I may be able to help you.  I'm a little in politics myself, and a word
to the school committee from a free and independent constituent might
get you a place."

He spoke jauntily though respectfully; but the offer reminded Constance
that the conversation was taking a more intimate turn than she had
bargained for.  She thanked him, and began to move slowly away, not
with any definite idea of direction, but as a maidenly interruption.
Mr. Stuart--for he had told her his name--kept pace with her and seemed
quite unconscious of her purpose.  In the few minutes during which they
had been chatting she had observed that he was somewhat above the
average height and rather spare, with a short mustache which curled up
at the ends and was becoming.  Also, that he had small, dark eyes,
which he moved rapidly and which gave him, in conjunction with his
rising brow and hair, a restless, nervous expression.

As they walked along the track the conductor was coming toward them.
He had been to the telegraph office and was returning with a telegram
in his hands.

"Well, what are our chances of getting away from here?" Emil asked,
with the manner of a man to whom time is precious.

"It'll be a good three hours before the wrecking train arrives and the
road is clear."

The youth and the maid looked at each other and laughed at the
gloominess of the situation.

"In that case," said Constance, glancing at the sloping banks bordering
the railroad tracks, which were bright with white weed and other flora
of the early summer time, "we shall have to dine on wild flowers."

"I have some chocolate in my bag."

Constance flushed slightly with embarrassment.  Her random remark
seemed almost to amount to a premeditated invitation to share his
resources.

Emil's gaze had followed hers in her allusion to the wild flowers.
"I'll tell you what," he exclaimed, impulsively, "since we have three
hours to wait, why shouldn't we escape from this culvert and see what
there is to be seen from the top of the bank?  I shall be able to show
you Benham," he added, noticing, perhaps, that she looked doubtful,
"for we are only nine or ten miles away."

This was tempting.  Besides it would surely be ridiculous to remain
where she was rather than explore the country merely because he was a
casual acquaintance and had some chocolate in his travelling bag.  The
circumstances were harmless and unavoidable, unless she wished to write
herself down a prude.  The result was the logic of common-sense
prevailed, and Constance gave her consent to the proposal.  So they
climbed the bank presently, pausing on the way to gather some posies,
with which the party of the second part proceeded to adorn her hat,
after they had established themselves on an eligible fallen tree
commanding a pleasing view.  The fallen tree was at the edge of a copse
of pine wood some two hundred yards from the bank.  Thus they were
sheltered from the sun.  Out of the copse, almost at their feet, ran a
bubbling brook, which added a touch of romance to the landscape rolling
away in undulating and occasionally wooded farming land, as far as the
eye could reach, until it terminated in a stretch of steeples and
towers surmounted by a murky cloud.  There was Benham.

Although they were too distant to discern more than a confused
panorama, Emil essayed a few topographical details.  He explained that
twenty-five years earlier Benham had comprised merely a cluster of
frame houses in the valley of the peaceful river Nye, which still
served as an aid to description.  Primarily a village on the south side
of the stream, it had first developed in a southerly direction,
spreading like a bursting seed also laterally to east and west.  Its
original main street, once bordered by old-fashioned frame houses with
grass-plots and shade trees, had evolved into Central Avenue, at first
the desirable street for residences, but now, and considerably prior to
his advent, the leading retail shopping artery, alive with dry-goods
shops, into which the women swarmed like flies.  To the west of Central
Avenue lay the tide of social fashion culminating two miles distant in
the River Drive, a wide avenue of stately private houses, situated
where the Nye made a broad bend to the north, and the new district
beyond the river, where the mansion of Carleton Howard, the railroad
magnate, stood a pioneer among Elysian fields of real estate
enterprise, sanctified by immaculate road surfaces and liberal electric
light.

Constance listened eagerly.  She was interested to know particulars
concerning the city where she was to live, and she enjoyed the lively
sardonic touches which relieved his description.  Though possessing an
essentially earnest soul, she was susceptible to humor, and had an
aversion for lack of appreciation of true conditions.

To the east of Central Avenue, Stuart further explained, lay first the
shops and the business centre, and then the polyglot army of citizens
who worked in the mills, oil yards, and pork factories.  Across the
river to the south, approached by seven bridges of iron, replacing two
frail wooden bridges of former days, were the mills and other
industrial establishments.  Beyond these still further to the north was
Poland, so called, a settlement of the Poles, favorite resort of the
young ladies of Benham's first families eager to offer the benefits of
religion and civilization to the ignorant poor.  Following the Nye in
its sweep to the north, until it deflected again to the east, so as to
run almost parallel to its first course, but in the opposite direction,
were the public park, the land bonded for an Art Museum, Wetmore
College (the Woman's Academy of learning), and the other more or less
ornamental institutions.  This region of embryo public buildings,
garnished with august spaces, was a sort of boundary line on the north,
turning the current of industrial population more to the east.  Just as
the tide to the west of Central Avenue was one of increasing comfort
and fashion, this to the southeast, stretching out as the city spread,
and forced constantly forward by the encroachments of trade, was one of
common workaday conditions, punctuated (as he phrased it) now and again
by poverty and distress.

"I tell you, Miss----"

"Forbes, Constance Forbes is my name."

"Thank you.  I tell you, Miss Forbes, Benham is a wideawake city.  We
have all the modern improvements.  But the rich man gets the cream
every time.  I heard millionaire Carleton Howard, the railroad magnate,
say the other day from the platform, that there is no country in the
world where the poor man is so well off as in this.  Yet it's equally
true that the rich are all the time getting richer and the poor poorer.
He neglected to state that."  He laughed scornfully, and his eyes
sought Constance's face for approval.  She knew little concerning
millionaires or the truth of the proposition he was advancing, but it
interested her to perceive that he was evidently on the side of the
unfortunate, for she cherished a keen pity for the ignorant poor almost
as a heritage.  Her father had been a country physician--an energetic,
sympathetic man, whose large vitality had been spent in relieving the
sufferings of a clientage of small tillers of the soil over an area of
fifteen miles.  He had often spoken to her with pathos of the patient
struggles of the common people.  Her own susceptibility to human
suffering had been early quickened by the destiny of her mother, who
had been thrown from a sleigh shortly after Constance's birth, and had
remained a paralytic invalid to the day of her death, requiring
incessant care.

"When I run for Congress," he resumed, scowling slightly as he fixed
his gaze on the murky cloud surmounting Benham, "it'll be on a platform
advocating government ownership of railroads, telegraphs, water-works,
electric street cars, and all the other fat things out of which our
modern philanthropists with capital squeeze enormous profits at the
expense of their fellow-citizens.  I'm against all that sort of thing.
Buy a gas plant to-day and consolidate it with another to-morrow.
Profit to the promoter two hundred per cent., without leaving the
office.  What does the consumer get?  Cheaper gas and greater
efficiency.  That's the fine-sounding tag; and some of the horny-handed
multitude are guileless enough to believe it.  It won't be long though
now before I make my own pile," he added, not quite relevantly.  "I'd
have made it before this if they hadn't hindered me."

Constance perceived that he expected her to inquire what this meant,
and she was curious to know.  So she asked.

"My employers, Toler & Company.  If I had had the capital and the
opportunities of those people, I should be wearing diamonds.  I've
tried to point out to them more than once that they were throwing big
chances away by being so conservative and old-fashioned in their
methods instead of branching out boldly and making a ten strike.  One
thing is certain, I'm not going to invent ideas for them for a pitiful
one thousand dollars a year much longer.  If they think they can afford
not to raise my salary and give me a chance to show what I can do, I'm
going to let them try after January first.  It isn't very pleasant,
Miss Forbes, to be doing most of the work and see someone else reaping
all the profits.  They can't help making money, old fogies as they are."

It was certainly a galling situation.  Constance, who was young
herself, felt that she sympathized with his desire to compel
recognition.

"It doesn't seem right at all," she said, "that you should be kept
down."

"I've made up my mind to give them notice that I must have an interest
in the business after the first of the year, or I quit and start on my
own account.  I've my eye on a man with five thousand dollars who will
go into partnership with me I hope."

Constance thought of her own five thousand dollars.  She would almost
like to lend it to him, though, of course, that was out of the
question.  Still, there would be no harm in offering moral support.
"If I were a man," she said, "and had faith in my own abilities, I
wouldn't remain in a subordinate position a moment longer than was
really necessary."

In response to this note of sympathy Emil opened his bag and produced
two sticks of chocolate.  He broke them apart and presented one to his
companion.  He also exhibited a compressible metal drinking-cup, which
he filled from the bubbling brook.  A crow cawed in the pine copse as
though to call attention to the idyl, but only the two philosophers on
the fallen tree-trunk were within hearing of his note of irony, and
they regarded it merely as an added rural charm.

"Would you object to my smoking my pipe?"

"Not in the least.  My father was devoted to his pipe."

Another bond of sympathy.  Or at least an indication to the swain that
here was a maiden who was no spoil-sport and who would not have to be
wooed by the sacrifice of personal comfort.  Moreover, it was not lost
on him that she was an attractive-looking maiden, and that her voice
was well modulated and refined.  Yet he was not thinking of her, but
merely of her sex in general, when he said, "Besides, I hope to be
married some day.  How could I support a wife in Benham on one thousand
dollars a year in the manner in which I should wish her to live?"

Constance could not answer this question, and did not try.  It belonged
to the category of remarks which were to be treated by a single woman
as monologues.  But she was keenly interested.  One thousand dollars a
year did not seem to her a very pitiful sum for a young couple just
starting in life.  She had heard her father say that when he married
her mother he had only a hundred dollars in the world, and no assurance
of practice.  But that was not in Benham.  She had already divined that
Benham was to be a land of surprises.  At all events she could not help
admiring Mr. Stuart's chivalric attitude toward his future wife.  His
ambition was obviously quickened by the thought of his future
sweetheart, whoever she might be; which was an agreeable tribute to her
own sex, suggesting susceptibility to sentiment.

"Yes, I'd have been married before this if Toler & Company had not, as
you say, kept me down," he continued, pensively, blowing a ring of
smoke to emphasize his mood.  "When after working hard all day I go to
my room at night and take up my violin, I often think that if I could
play to the woman I loved, instead of to the blank wall, how much
happier I should be.  But I suppose some of my friends would declare
that I was a fool to desire a yoke around my neck before fate placed it
there."

His own readiness to relieve the stress of his confession by a sardonic
turn counteracted the constraint which his intimate avowal had aroused.
Incredible as it is that a man in his sober senses should offer himself
to a woman the first time he beholds her, no woman is altogether
unaware that he is liable to do so.  A modest and thoughtful young girl
shrinks from precipitate progress in affairs of the heart.  Obviously
the ground was less dangerous than it had for a moment appeared, but
Constance sought the avenue of escape which his allusion to music
offered.  Besides it pleased her to hear that he was æsthetic in his
interests.

"You play on the violin, then?" she asked.  "I envy anybody who has the
talent and the opportunity for anything of that sort.  I sing a little,
but my voice is uncultivated, for in Colton there was no one to tell us
our faults."  The earnest gleam in her fine dark eyes seemed to second
the fresh enthusiasm of her tone.

The warning scream of the whistle, not the voice of the crow, broke in
at this point on their preoccupation with each other.  This was the
romantic episode from which their acquaintance dated--an episode which
might readily have signified nothing.  But on the other hand, it
naturally supplied to the party of the second part a fair field of
memory in which her imagination might wander when stirred by the
subsequent attentions of this young knight with sympathy for the
unfortunate, resolute confidence in his own abilities, generous views
in regard to matrimony and a sensitive, æsthetic soul.  For Emil Stuart
sought her out at once, visited her at her lodgings and gave
unmistakable signs that his purpose was both honorable and definite.
Within six months she knew from his own lips that he wished to make her
his wife.  She took another three in which to conquer her scruples and
maidenly disinclination to be won too easily.  Why should she not
yield?  He was her first lover, and she loved him, and he declared with
fervor that he adored her.  Contact with the conditions of a large city
had shown her unmistakably that only after years of struggle could she
hope to be more than a mere hand-maiden in the work of education, and
that during the early period of her employment, if not indeed for life,
the hours of work would be long and confining and her pleasures few.
Here was a companion who would provide her with a home, and upon whom
the tenderness of her woman's nature could be freely bestowed.  It was
the old, old story, she said to herself, but was there a better one?




II

The young couple bought a small house on the outskirts of the city,
some distance beyond the Nye, where it flows at right angles with its
original course, and in the general region of fastidious growth, but in
a settlement of inexpensive villas to one side of the trend of fashion.
The bridegroom had not forgotten his liberal intention to begin
housekeeping on a somewhat more ambitious scale than his salary as a
clerk had warranted.  He was now the senior partner in the firm of
Stuart & Robinson, lumber dealers, which had been in existence six
months.  He had parted from his employers, Toler & Company, on the
first of January, because of their refusal to accede to his demands,
and had been able to persuade the comrade with five thousand dollars,
to whom he had referred at his first meeting with Constance to enter
into a business alliance.  Robinson was three years his junior, and
without commercial experience, but eager to turn the windfall, which
had come to him through the death of an aunt into a cool million.  What
could be more natural than to take advantage of the experience which
Stuart offered him--an experience which gave promise of swift and
lucrative operations in the near future?

It was a very modest establishment, from the standpoint of affluence.
A neat little house of eight rooms supplied with modern improvements,
and, though one of a builder's batch, designed with some regard for
artistic effect, which indicated that a preference for harmonious
beauty was working in the popular mind of Benham against the idols,
colorless uniformity and bedizened ugliness.  To the bride, whose
experience of housekeeping was limited to a country town where
colorless uniformity ruled undisturbed and modern improvements were
unknown, the expenditure of her nest-egg of five thousand dollars in
this complete little home seemed an investment no less enchanting than
wise.  Five thousand for the house, with a subsequent mortgage upon it
of one thousand for the purchase of the furniture and to provide a
small bank balance for emergencies.  This was her contribution to the
domestic partnership, and she rejoiced to think that her ability to
help to this extent would leave Emil a free hand for the display of his
business talent.

The basis of a newly married woman's peace of soul is trust.  She feels
that the responsibility is on her husband to make good the manly
qualities with which she has endowed him, and because of which she has
consented to become his mate.  Occasionally during the first few months
of her married life Constance laughed to think that all her maidenly
eagerness to solve the riddle of life brilliantly, and all her profound
searching of the mysteries of the universe should have ended in her
becoming an every-day housewife with dustpan and brush, and the wife of
one who, to all outward appearances, was an every-day young man.  But
her laugh savored of gladness.  She had given herself to him because
she had faith that his energy, self-reliance, fearless humor and
sympathetic hatred of shams would distinguish him presently from the
common herd of men, and vindicate her infatuation.  She had given
herself to him, besides, because he loved her--a delightful
consciousness.  Accordingly, she enclosed herself in the web of
happiness which her confidence in him had spun about her, and took up
her domestic duties with light-hearted devotion.

Nevertheless, no woman emerges from her honeymoon with exactly the same
estimate of her lover as before.  If nothing else, she has seen his
mental and moral characteristics in their undress, so to speak, and
become habituated to their sublimity.  We may be no less fond of a
person whose anecdotes have grown familiar to us, and analogously a
wife does not weary of her husband's qualities merely because they have
lost the glamor of novelty.  On the contrary she is apt to continue to
adore them because they are his.  Still she feels free to scrutinize
them closely and--unconsciously at least--to submit them to the test of
her own silent judgment.  She discovers, too, of course, that he has
sides and idiosyncrasies the existence of which she never suspected.
Ordinarily she finds to her surprise that his attitude in regard to
this or that matter has shifted perceptibly since marriage, so that,
instead of being lukewarm or ardent, as the case may be, he has become
almost strenuous or indifferent in his attitude.  Hence she divines
that during their courtship some of his real opinions and tendencies
have been kept in retreat.

Constance sensibly had decided in advance that Emil was not perfect, so
she was prepared to discover a blemish here and there.  In spite of her
happiness it became obvious to her during the first six months of their
married life that the self-confidence which had attracted her verged at
times on braggadocio, and moreover that opposition or disappointment
made him sour and morose.  If his affairs were prospering, his spirits
rose, his wits scintillated, and he spoke of the world with a gay, if
sardonic, forbearance, which suggested that it was soon to be his
foot-ball.  But if matters went wrong, he not only became depressed,
but was prone to dwell upon his own ill-luck, and inveigh bitterly
against the existing conditions of society.  She had noticed from the
first days of their acquaintance that there appeared to be an
inconsistency between his eagerness to grow rich and his enmity toward
the capitalists of Benham; but she had gathered that he was merely
eager to put himself in a position where his sympathy for the toiling
mass could be fortified by the opportunities which wealth would afford.
But now that his feverish absorption in business had apparently
banished all interest in philanthropic undertakings from his thoughts,
the inconsistency was more conspicuous.

Constance spoke to Emil about this at last.  Naturally, she broached
the topic when he was in one of his sanguine moods.  In response he
took out his pocket-book and asked her how much she required, having
jumped to the conclusion that she was beating around the bush and had
some particular object of charity in view.

"You don't understand, exactly, Emil," she answered.  "I'm not asking
for money; I was merely hoping that having me to provide for isn't
going to cut you off from your former associations--to lessen your
sympathy with political movements for the protection of the people such
as you used to take part in before we were married."

Stuart frowned, and thrust his hands deep into his pockets as he was
apt to do when he felt his oats.  "You don't seem to realize,
Constance, that a man starting in business needs all his energy and
watchfulness to avoid having his head thrust under water by the fellows
who are on the surface of the commercial whirlpool and who don't want
company.  When I've got the sharks in my line of trade where I want
them, which is, metaphorically speaking, at the bottom of the pond,
it'll be time enough to take up politics.  You'd like to see me in
Congress some day, wouldn't you?  Well, that will be plain sailing for
me in this district as soon as I control the lumber business of Benham,
little saint."

This sounded plausible, and did not seem to admit of argument, provided
the consummation of the business supremacy indicated by her husband was
not deferred too long.  She dismissed the matter from her mind for the
time being.  It was less easy to dispose of another tendency which had
revealed itself in unmistakable guise since their marriage, and this
was Emil's indifferent attitude, not merely toward her form of
religious faith, but toward all religion.  Within a short time after
their acquaintance began she had discovered that he was not an
Episcopalian, and that his views regarding the spiritual problems of
the universe were not those of orthodox Christians.  But on the other
hand, although he was fond even then of blowing down her card-houses,
as he called them, with an occasional blast of scientific truth, he had
been ready to accompany her to church and had never seemed lacking in
reverence.  She had asked herself the question why she should stifle
her love for him merely because his conception of the eternal mysteries
did not coincide with her own, and she had answered it by the
independent assurance that his attitude toward life was the important
consideration.  She had even been fascinated by his broad outlook on
the universe, with his flashing eyes and his righteous contempt for
some of the dogmas of the sects.  He had seemed to her imagination at
such times almost as a reforming archangel purging away the dross of
superstition and convention from the essentials of religious faith.  He
did not believe in the miracles, it is true, because he regarded them
as violations of the laws of the universe; but was he not a firm
believer in the spirit of Christian conduct?

She had reasoned thus as a maiden, and had never doubted the soundness
of her self-justification.  But the sequel was disturbing to her peace
of mind and to her hopes.  It was not Emil's refusal to go to church,
nor his dedication of the Sabbath to mere rest and recreation which
distressed her, but his scornful tone in regard to any form of
religious ceremonial; his scornful tone toward her own reverence for
the faith in which she had been educated.  Even the term of endearment
which he coined for her, "little saint," was a jocose and condescending
appellation reflecting on her susceptibility to ideas which clever
people had discarded as fatuous.  She could have borne without
complaint going to church alone had he been willing to respect her
opinions as she respected his.  But on her return from service he was
sure to greet her with some ironical jest which made painfully clear
that he regarded her habit of worship as a sign of mental inferiority.
His own habit on Sunday was to remain in bed until after the church
hour.  Then he would establish himself in a loose-fitting woolen
garment, which he called his smoking-jacket, on the porch or in the
sitting-room and read the Sunday papers, with a pipe in his mouth.
Sometimes he played on his violin, and by the time Constance returned
he was ready for a short walk, ostensibly for the sake of exercising a
small black and white terrier.  His wife could not accompany him on
this stroll, for she could not neglect their mid-day dinner, and when
he sat down at table he was apt, if the weather was fine, to refer
pathetically to the sin of having wasted it in the city.  "If only you
were content, little saint, to worship nature with me," he would say,
"we would get away into the country with a luncheon basket the first
thing in the morning and make a day of it in the woods."

There was something winsome in this proposition, especially as the
inability to enjoy an outing because of her reluctance to renounce
church worship seemed to spoil his day in a double sense.  For, as a
consequence, he ate a huge Sunday dinner, including two bottles of
beer, smoked more than his wont, and after a tirade against the evils
of monopoly or some kindred topic invariably fell into a heavy slumber
on the lounge, from which he did not awaken until nearly sunset.

"Another Sunday wasted," he more than once remarked by way of
melancholy comment on this state of affairs.

No wonder that Constance was perplexed as to her duty.  Since coming to
Benham she had been a member of Rev. George Prentiss's parish.  Her
mother was of English descent, and Constance had been brought up in the
Episcopal faith.  At Colton there had been no church of that
denomination, and to attend the Episcopal service one had to drive or
walk two miles to a neighboring village.  It had often seemed to
Constance more important to remain at home with her invalid mother than
to take this excursion.  Consequently, during her girlhood, she had
been irregular in her attendance at church.  Frequently, in order to be
able to return home more speedily, she had worshipped at the Methodist
or Unitarian meeting-house in the village.  Sometimes she had stayed
away altogether; therefore she understood the fascination of communion
with books or with spring buds or autumn leaves as a substitute for
worship in the sanctuary.  Her untrammelled experience had made her
open-minded and independent, but on the other hand the difficulty of
kneeling at her own shrine had nourished her sentiment for the
Episcopal faith, so that she had rejoiced spiritually in the
opportunity, which her residence in Benham afforded, to become a
regular and devoted member of Mr. Prentiss's flock.  Moreover, the
vital character of St. Stephen's as a religious body had appealed to
her.  The little church near Colton had been a peaceful and poetic, but
poor and unenterprising establishment.  Contrasted with it, St.
Stephen's appeared a splendid and powerful influence for righteousness,
stirring deeply her æsthetic sensibilities, and at the same time
proving its living, practical grasp on human character through its able
pastor and active organization.  St. Stephen's never slumbered; St.
Stephen's prided itself on its ardent faith and essentially modern
spirit; and St. Stephen's, by common acceptance, was synonymous with
its rector, Rev. George Prentiss.

Mr. Prentiss had grown up with the church.  That is, he had been curate
to the Rev. Henry Glynn, an Englishman who had selected Benham as a
promising pasture for the propagation of the Episcopal faith beyond the
pale of the mother country, who had gone forth into the wilderness and
had lived to see a goodly flock of sheep browsing beneath his
ministrations.  Mr. Glynn was a pioneer, and had gone forth in the
early seventies when Benham was in the throes of rapid progress and
extraordinary development from month to month.  His mission had been to
spread the tenets of his sect by the zeal and eloquence of his
testimony, and to provide a suitable edifice for the human souls
attracted by his teachings.  In his time the congregation forsook the
small and primitive structure, erected in hot haste within a year of
his arrival, for a commodious and sufficiently æsthetic building.
Before his death, which occurred prematurely, Benham had become a large
and important municipality.  His successor found himself not only the
pastor of the leading Episcopal Church of the city--which had also in
the process of social evolution become the most fashionable and
probably the richest church in the city--but a shepherd in a wilderness
of a different sort.  In other words, he was brought suddenly face to
face with the problems which confront earnest spirits eager to redeem
human nature in a huge industrial community.  The former wilderness had
blossomed, even with the rose, but the thistles, tares, and rank grass
which fought for mastery with the wholesome vegetation had
revolutionized the soil.  There were scores of saloons in Benham; there
was a herd of immoral women on the streets of Benham; and, most
perplexing problem of all, perhaps, there were, only a mile apart, the
picturesque neighborhood of the Riverside Drive with its imposing,
princely, private mansions, and Smith Street, boulevard of unwholesome
tenement-houses, garnished with rumshops and squalid lives--contrast
repugnant and disconcerting to American ideals, and to him as an
American.

But Rev. George Prentiss was not the man to shrink from deep and
important responsibilities.  On the contrary, it might be said of him
that he revelled in them.  The consciousness that, in spite of Benham's
mushroom-like growth as a proud testimonial to the sacredness of
institutions established by the free-born, the city had begun closely
to resemble large cities everywhere was sobering, but on the whole,
inspiriting to him as a worker.  His mission was clearly disclosed to
him--a mission worthy of the energies of a clergyman eager to bring his
church into closer touch with everyday life and common human
conditions.  For Mr. Prentiss as an American and a churchman was
ambitious for the future of the Episcopal faith.  His predecessor and
friend had seen in their pastorate only a glorious continuation of
English orthodoxy--a spiritual revolt from dissent, transcendentalism
and cold, intellectual independence, which would, in the end, gather
sixty million people into a Protestant fold, national in its title and
dimensions.  Mr. Prentiss shared this delectable vision, but he would
not have American Episcopacy a mere blind imitation of the mother
church or a colonial dependency.  He felt that it behooved those of his
faith on this side of the Atlantic to gird their loins zealously, and
to guide their sheep fearlessly, receiving with respectful attention
the interpretations of the spiritual lords of Great Britain regarding
dogma, but exercising intelligent discretion in regard to their
adoption.  This attitude, which might be called patriotism, in some
sense reflected the pride which Dante, that stern censor of prelates,
condemns.  Was the Church of England to prescribe doctrine to the
thriving, hardy child of its loins forever?  Surely not, now that that
child, waxing in size and resources and dignified with power, promised
soon to rival its parent.  It was agreeable to the rector of St.
Stephen's to reflect that the tide of fashion was bearing the children
of Unitarian and other indeterminate faiths into the fold of the true
and living church of Christ.  It was also agreeable to behold in his
mind's eye that church--the American church--taking advantage of this
splendid opportunity and accepting with fearless and uncompromising
zeal the challenge of infidelity and materialism.  The people were
tired, he believed, of intellectual, spiritual dissipation, in which
each soul formed its own conception of God, and defined the terms of
its own compact with Him.  They were welcoming fervor, passion, color
and all the symbols of a faith which beholds in man a miserable sinner
redeemed through the blood of Christ.  If the people of his nationality
had been reluctant in the days of their early history, when population
was sparse and sin was kept at bay by primitive economic conditions, to
admit that man was a sinner, could they doubt it now?  Was not Benham
with its bustling, seething, human forces an eloquent testimonial to
the reality of evil and the intensity of the struggle between the
powers of darkness?  The Church's mission--his mission--was to take an
active part, in a modern spirit, in the great work of regeneration by
bringing light to the blind, sympathy and relief to the down-trodden
and protection to the oppressed.

Mr. Prentiss had carried his theories energetically into practice.  He
had striven to make St. Stephen's a tabernacle for the prosperous and
the fortunate and also for the desolate and the friendless.  His wish
would have been to see them intermingled at morning service without
regard to vested rights, but his wardens assured him that the finances
of the church could not be conducted successfully except on the basis
of inviolable pew ownership until after the morning service had begun.
But he was able to throw the church open in the afternoon to the
general public, and to reserve in the morning certain gallery and less
desirable benches for the accommodation of young men and women students
who wished to worship regularly and could not afford to hire seats.  If
it was at first a tribulation to him that his congregation was rich and
fashionable and a little stolid, their liberality on collection days
was a great compensation, for it gave him scope for extending his
influence along the line of his ambition by the establishment of the
mission church, known as the Church of the Redeemer, in the heart of
Benham's arid social quarter, as an adjunct to St. Stephen's, and to be
maintained by the generosity of that body of Christians.  When this
undertaking was in full operation, under the direction of a competent
curate, Mr. Prentiss experienced fewer qualms as he looked down from
his reading-desk at the gay bonnets and costly toilets of his own
parishioners.  He had been assured by several women active in church
work that the independent poor were not fond of worshipping where their
clothes would show at a disadvantage.  As a Christian who was an
American, he deplored the formation of classes in the sheep-fold of the
church; yet he reasoned that the preferences of human nature could not
be ignored altogether in a matter of this kind, and it was evident that
his parishioners preferred to worship God in full possession of their
property rights, surrounded by their social acquaintance.  There was a
zest, too, in the knowledge that he was the rector of the important and
powerful people of the city, and that he had the opportunity to
denounce the commercial spirit of the age in the presence of men like
Carleton Howard, the millionaire, and women like his sister, Mrs.
Randolph Wilson, and their friends.  If he could reach their hearts,
what might he not hope for?  Obviously by the support of this class the
Church could not fail to increase its revenues and extend its power.
The triumph of the Church was after all, for him, the essential
thing--the illumination of the souls of men through faith in the
Christian ideal.  So with this end constantly in view, Rev. George
Prentiss ministered to his well-favored congregation in St. Stephen's,
and vicariously, and often by personal service, conducted a crusade
against ignorance and sin in the Church of the Redeemer and its
neighborhood.




III

Constance Forbes had been one of the students who found a haven on the
free benches at St. Stephen's.  Almost at once Mr. Prentiss noticed her
and, struck by her interesting face, he sent the church deaconess, Mrs.
Hammond, to visit her at her lodgings.  She was invited to join a Bible
class of young women of her own age, and welcomed to the social parlor
in the vestry provided for girls who, like herself, were strangers in
Benham.  Here there were magazines, writing materials, and afternoon
tea.  While availing herself of these privileges, Constance frequently
met her rector.  He inquired sympathetically concerning her work and
aspirations, and showed afterward that he kept her distinctly in mind.
She felt that she could freely consult him if she were in need of
advice; once or twice she did consult him about her reading; and she
was gratified by the interest which he took in her marriage.

Consequently, the idea of not attending morning service was distressing
to her.  She felt sure that Mr. Prentiss would notice it and be
disappointed.  Yet, what were Mr. Prentiss and his feelings in
comparison with her obligation to her husband?  Emil's Sundays were
spoiled because she would not accompany him to the country instead of
going to church.  His attitude was unreasonable and absurd, but the
fact remained that he did not go alone, and lounged at home instead.
After all, she was no longer a girl, and her religious faith would not
be imperilled were she to miss church now and then.  Moreover, though
she held fast to her creed and deplored Emil's radical views, she knew
in her heart that she was more critical than formerly of what she heard
in church, and that she was sometimes driven by her doubts as to the
possibility of supernatural happenings to seek refuge behind the
impenetrable fortress of a righteous life.  There she was safe and
happy, and free, it seemed to her, from the responsibility of harassing
her young housewife's brains with non-essentials.  Might it not be for
her own advantage to take a respite from religious functions?
Certainly her companionship to Emil seemed more important at the moment
than her own habit of public worship.

She began by staying away from church occasionally.  Emil expressed
delight at her reasonableness and carried out with zest his plan of a
Sunday outing.  It was a simple matter on their bicycles, or by a few
minutes in the train, to reach country air and sylvan scenes, and he
was entirely satisfied to spend the day in tramping through the woods
and fields, stopping to fish or to lie in the sun as the humor seized
him.  The working-man's Sabbath, he termed it.  The programme was
restful and alluring to Constance also.  Her husband on these occasions
seemed less at odds with the world, and willing to enjoy himself
without rancor or argument.  After their luncheon he would smoke
complacently for awhile and then take up his fiddle and practise upon
it with genuine content for an hour or more, while she sat with her
back against a tree or a bank, reading.  He still drank his bottles of
beer, but if he slumbered, it was only for a brief period.  He never
neglected his fiddle, and its influence appeared, as it were, to soothe
his savage breast, and to make him good-humored and agreeably
philosophic.  He was too fond of theorizing to neglect altogether these
opportunities for the enunciation of his grievances against
civilization, but he was lively instead of bitter, a distinction which
meant much to his wife.

When their first baby was born, these Sunday excursions were
temporarily discontinued; but Constance was eager to renew them, for
Emil, after going alone a few times, relapsed into his old habits.
Accordingly, as soon as the little one was able to toddle, a child's
wagon was procured, which Emil was ready to draw, and by avoiding
fences and other barriers, the difficulties presented by this new tie
were overcome.  By the time the child was a year and a half old,
Constance realized that she had been to church but once in the last
twelve months.

This had been partly due to the action of the rector of St. Stephen's,
for Constance knew within a few weeks of her first absences from church
that her conduct had been noticed.  The curate, Mr. Starkworth,
inquired at the door if there had been illness in the family.  Later
the deaconess made a call of friendly observation, in the course of
which it transpired that Mr. Prentiss had observed that Mrs. Stuart no
longer occupied her seat.  The culprit did not attempt to explain, and
within a fortnight she received a visit from the rector himself.  No
one could have been more affable and reassuring.  He established
himself in an easy chair and accepted graciously the cigar which Emil
proffered him.  He was a large man of dignified mien and commanding
person, clerical as to his dress and visage, but with a manner of
conversation approximating that of men of the world--an individual
manifestation which was intended to reveal a modern spirit.  He was
clearly a person with whom liberties could not be taken, and yet
evidently one who desired to divest his point of view of cant, and to
put religion on a man to man, business basis so far as was consistent
with his sacred calling.  He asked genial questions concerning their
domestic welfare, and the progress of the new lumber firm, spoke
shrewdly of local politics in which he supposed that Stuart was
engaged, and sought obviously to give the impression that he was an
all-round man in his sympathies, and that he took an active interest in
temporal matters.  When at last there was a favorable pause in the
current of this secular conversation, Mr. Prentiss laid his hands on
his knees, and, bending forward and looking from one to the other in a
friendly way, said with decision:

"I have missed you two young people at church lately."

[Illustration: "I have missed you two young people at church lately."]

Constance winced at the inquiry, and her eyes fell beneath the
clergyman's searching gaze.  She could not deny the impeachment, which
was embarrassing.  At the same time the color had scarcely mounted to
her cheeks before she felt the force of her defence rising to her
support, and she looked up.  She appreciated that it was incumbent on
her, as the active church member, to respond, and she became suddenly
solicitous lest Emil might, and so make matters worse.  In truth,
Emil's first impulse had been toward anger.  It was one of his maxims
not to submit to browbeating.  But what he regarded as the humor of the
proceeding changed his wrath into scorn, and he closed his teeth on his
pipe with the dogged air of a master of the situation willing to be
amused withal.  Mr. Prentiss divined in a flash, from the insolence of
this expression, that he had to deal with a hopeless case--so far as
the human soul can ever seem hopeless to the missionary--a contemptuous
materialist, and his own countenance grew grave as he turned back to
the wife.

"Yes, we have been very little, Mr. Prentiss.  My husband, you know,
does not belong to your church.  He went with me while we were engaged,
but--but now I think I can help him best by staying away for the
present."

"You go elsewhere, then?"

"No.  We do not go to church.  We spend our Sundays in the country--in
the fresh air, walking and resting.  We take our luncheon, and my
husband brings his fiddle and his fishing rod."

Constance marvelled at her own boldness, and at the ardor with which
she delivered her plea of justification.

"I understand," said Mr. Prentiss.  His tone was sober, but not
impatient.  The argument for a day of rest and recreation for the tired
man of affairs was nothing new to him.  Nor was Mr. Prentiss ignorant
of its plausible value.  He wished to meet it without temper, as one
rational being discussing with another, notwithstanding eternal
verities were concerned.

"Supposing, Mrs. Stuart, that everyone were to reason in the same way,
what would become of our churches?"

"They would have to go out of commission," muttered Emil with delighted
brusqueness.

The rector saw fit to bear this brutality without offence.  He ignored
the commentator with his eyes, as though to indicate that his mission
was solely to the wife, but he answered,

"They would, and the Christian faith would perish in the process.  Are
you, Mrs. Stuart," he continued, "prepared to do without the offices of
religion, and to substitute for them a pagan holiday?"

"We pass the day very quietly and simply," said Constance.  "We disturb
no one and interfere with no one."

"But you become pagans, utterly."

"I try to think that God hears my prayers in the open air no less than
in church, while I am keeping my husband company."  It wounded her to
oppose her rector, yet the need of a champion for her husband's cause
supplied her with speech, and gave to her countenance quiet
determination.  Constance possessed one of those lithe, nervous
personalities, so frequently to be met with in American women of every
class, the signal attribute of which is bodily and mental refinement.
Her hair was dark, her face thin, her eyes brown and wistful, her
figure tall and elastic; her pretty countenance had the charm of
temperament rather than mere flesh and blood, and its sympathetic,
intelligent comeliness suggested spiritual vigor.

Mr. Prentiss was not blind to these qualities.  They had attracted him
at the beginning of their acquaintance, and he was the more solicitous
on account of them to reclaim her from error.

"God hears your prayers wherever you utter them, be assured of that.
But I ask you to consider whether the habit of neglecting public
worship is not a failure in reverence to the Christ who listens to our
supplications and without whose aid we are helpless to overcome sin."

Emil had been delighted by his wife's sturdy attitude.  Now that a
question of doctrine was brought into the discussion, he felt that the
time had come for him to intervene again.  "We who worship in the
presence of nature are not hampered by dogmas of that kind," he said.
"Temptation is temptation, and I for one have never been able to
understand why the man who gets the better of it isn't entitled to the
credit of his strength and sense.  My wife looks at such things very
much as I do."

"Not altogether, Emil.  You know I miss not going to church."

"I have never prevented you from going."

"But you have discountenanced it, man.  It is to please you, and to
humor your views that your wife is sacrificing her most sacred
convictions," Mr. Prentiss exclaimed with a touch of sternness.

"You think church-going of the utmost importance; I do not.  There's
where we differ.  Everyone must decide those questions for himself--or
herself."

The rector resented the smug assurance of the retort by a frown and a
twist of his shoulders, as though he were sorry that he had
condescended to bandy words with this irreverent person.

"Yes, we all must," he said, addressing Constance.  "'He that loveth
father or mother more than me is not worthy of me.'"

He regretted the next instant having indulged in this clerical formula,
which was foreign to his usual method.

Constance flushed at the words of Scripture, then she drew herself up
slightly and said:

"I am very sorry, indeed, to disappoint you, Mr. Prentiss, but I can't
promise to attend church regularly at present.  Perhaps it is true, as
my husband says, that my opinions have changed somewhat in regard to
points of faith.  I hope--I shall pray that after a time we may both
come back to you."

There was no mistaking the finality of this unequivocal but gently
uttered speech, and Mr. Prentiss knew that one of the signs of a man of
the world is the capacity to take a hint.  Though it galled him to
leave this attractive member of his flock in the clutches of one so
apparently unfit to appreciate her bodily or spiritual graces, he
recognized that to press the situation at this point could result only
in separating her still further from the influence of the church.  "You
shall have my prayers, too--both of you," he said, fervently.  Then he
arose and resumed the demeanor of a friendly caller.

But Emil, now that he had shown clearly that he had the courage of his
convictions, felt the need of vindicating his character as a host.  He
said jauntily, "I hope there's no offence in standing up for what one
believes to be true.  It's one of the greatest poets, you know, who
wrote

  There lives more faith in honest doubt,
  Believe me, than in half the creeds."


"You young whipper snapper!" was Mr. Prentiss's unuttered comment, but
he did not relax his lay serenity of manner save by the slight vein of
sarcasm which his words contained.  "No offence, certainly.  But you
should also bear in mind, young man, that others no less mentally
qualified than yourself have pondered the problems of the universe and
come to very different conclusions.  A man takes large responsibilities
upon himself in deciding to deprive his wife and children of the
comforts of religion."

"I am anxious that my children when they grow up may not be obliged, as
I was, to unlearn what they were taught to believe in their youth,"
Emil retorted with smiling effrontery.  He was pleased with his wife
and with himself and he was glad to get in a final body blow on the
person of this officious slummer, as he subsequently described their
visitor.

"I am not unfamiliar with that line of argument," said Mr. Prentiss, in
the act of departure.  "But I invite you to consider whether your
children, when they are old enough to think for themselves, will be
grateful for the substitute which you offer for doctrine.  They ask for
bread, and what do you give them?  A stone."

Emil laughed.  He was content to let the parson have the last word.  He
stood for a moment on the door-step watching him march down the street.
He felt that he had turned the tables on him completely and had thereby
won a victory for clear thinking and freedom of thought.  He exclaimed
exultantly as he re-entered the parlor, "I guess that'll teach the old
duck to stay in his own barn-yard and not come waddling down here to
try to get us to believe that the world was made in seven days and
Jonah was swallowed by the whale."

Constance, who had fallen into troubled reverie, looked up and
exclaimed with emphasis, "Mr. Prentiss is a very reasonable man about
such matters, Emil.  He used particularly to tell his Bible class that
the language of the Old Testament is sometimes metaphorical."

"Yes, I know how the clergy jump and change feet to avoid being
cornered.  I'm aware they explain that the seven days were not our days
of twenty-four hours, but were symbolic terms for geological stretches
of time.  Do you call that ingenuous?"

Constance winced.  It happened that Mr. Prentiss had offered just this
explanation of holy writ, and somehow, now that Emil held it up to
scorn, the rector's commentary appeared flimsy.  She sighed, then with
emotion said, "Emil, I wish you would tell me what you really do
believe."

"Believe?"  He smiled indulgently as he echoed his wife's inquiry, but
his eyes snapped and his shock of hair seemed to stand up straighter.
His manner expressed a mixture of amused condescension and the tartness
of a dogged spirit suspicious of attack.  "I believe, for one thing,
that the laws of nature are never violated, and that their integrity is
a grander attribute of divinity than the various sensational devices
which the orthodox maintain that an all-wise God employs to attract the
attention of men to Himself.  I believe also that you in your secret
soul entirely agree with me."

Constance was silent a moment.  "And yet you haven't answered my
question, Emil.  You haven't told me what you do believe.  Why isn't
religion just as real and true a part of man as any other instinct of
his being?  It has been a constantly growing attribute."

"And the nonsense is being gradually squeezed out of it.  Why should I
accept the dogma of that reverend father in God that a man can do
nothing by his own efforts?  Isn't it a finer thought that we grow by
virtue of our struggles and that the free and independent soul wins the
battle of life by making the most of itself?"

Emil spoke with fierce rhetoric.  To his wife's ear he seemed to be
pointing out besides that his own soul was fighting this battle and
that he was willing to be judged by the results regardless of doctrine.
Constance had long ago convinced herself that his bark was worse than
his bite; that he believed more than he really admitted of the
essentials of religion; that he acknowledged his responsibility to God
and was devoting his days to advancing the useful work of the world,
and incidentally providing for her happiness at the same time.  His
plea for credit to the independent soul which overcame temptation and
obstacles was, at least, manly, and a sign of courage.  She scarcely
heeded the quotation from the "Rubaiyat," which he was murmuring as a
corollary to his apostrophe to free and noble endeavor.

  O thou who didst with pitfall and with gin
  Beset the path I was to wander in,
    Thou wilt not with predestined evil round
  Enmesh and then impute my fall to sin?


She had heard him quote these lines and others of like import before,
and she had learned some of them by rote.  She recognized their charm
and cleverness and to a certain extent their plausibility; but she had
not the slightest impulse to revolutionize her own faith.  Her
absorbing thought, for the moment, was how to be true to her husband
without being false to the church.  Mr. Prentiss, in spite of his
appeal, had left her conscience unconvinced, and now her clear-headed,
fearless Emil had suddenly given her soul the cue to expression.  Her
brown eyes kindled rapturously and trustfully as she said:

"It's the life after all which counts, isn't it?  Everything else is of
secondary importance."

"Of course," said Emil.  "And when it comes to that," he added,
"there's no one in the world who can pick a flaw in yours, you little
saint."

"You mustn't say things like that," Constance murmured.  Nevertheless,
so far as it was a manifestation of confidence from the man she loved,
it was pleasant to hear.

From this time her attendance at church was very infrequent.  She did
not cease to go altogether, but almost every Sunday was spent in
expeditions in the open air.  The cares resulting from the birth of two
children necessarily interfered with her going regularly to service
while they were infants, and as soon as they were able to walk, the
Sunday outings were resumed with the little boy and girl as companions.
Mr. Prentiss did not revisit the house, but on each of the two or three
occasions when Constance occupied her old seat in St. Stephen's, she
felt that the rector had noticed her.  He had apparently left her to
her devices, but his glance told her that she was not forgotten.




IV

It is fitting and fortunate that a young woman in a large city, who has
given her happiness into the keeping of a man with his own way to make,
should be ignorant of her peril, and that charmed by love she should
take for granted that he will succeed.  But the rest of the world has
no excuse for being equally blind, since the rest of the world is aware
that there is no recipe by which a girl of twenty can secure a guaranty
either of domestic happiness or ability on the part of her lover to
hold his own in the competition for a livelihood.  It is easy for the
moralist of society, writing at his desk, to utter the solemn truth
that young people should not rush hastily into matrimony.  Assuredly
they should not.  But after all, is it to be wondered at that so many
of them do?  Love is the law of life.  The renewal of the race through
the union of the sexes is an instinct which asserts itself in spite of
code and thesis, and the institution of lawful wedlock is the bit by
which civilization regulates it.  Let us, says the modern scientist,
isolate the degenerate members of society, the diseased, the vicious,
and the improvident, and prevent them from having offspring.  But still
the priest of Rome, eager for fresh converts, but wise, too, in his
knowledge of the law of sex, whispers to his flock "marry early," and
adds under his breath, "lest ye sin."  It is a part of religion,
perhaps, for the daughters of the well-to-do, who have been screened
from contact with the rough world, and who sit in judgment on several
lovers in the paternal drawing-room, to weigh and ponder and to call in
the brain to assist, or if needs be, silence the heart.  Yet even they
sometimes elope instead with the wrong man against whom they have been
warned, and are unhappy--or happy--ever afterward.  But when we turn
from these privileged young persons--the pretty, daintily dressed young
women in their Easter bonnets, who worship at our fashionable
churches--and from some height look out over wide stretches of streets
with every house alike, the homes of the average working population,
and reflect that every house shelters the consequences of a marriage,
shall we ask pitilessly, "How came ye so?"  And if the answer of some
be "we met and loved and married, and now we are miserable," shall we
draw ourselves up and tell them that the fault is theirs, that
marriages are (or should be) made in heaven, and that they ought to
have discovered before they plighted their troth that John would be a
rascal or Mary a slattern?  Is it not the privilege and the blessing of
the young to trust?  Shall we blame them if, in the ignorance of youth
and under the spell of the law of their beings, they mistake unworthy
souls for their ideals?

The firm of Stuart & Robinson, dealers in lumber, had started with a
small capital, but the senior partner had confidence in his capacity to
do a large business.  His late employers, Toler & Company, according to
his opinion, had been old fogies in their methods.  To adopt his own
metaphor, instead of getting up early and shaking the trees, they
expected to have ripe peaches served to them on Sevrès china, or, in
other words, they let great opportunities slip through their fingers.
He proceeded during the first year to carry out several enterprises
which he had vainly called to their attention while in their service,
and he had the satisfaction of proving his wisdom and of doubling the
firm's assets at the same time.  Emil's plans were essentially on a
large scale, and he was confessedly cramped even after this success.
He explained to his wife that if only he had the necessary capital, he
would be able at one fell swoop to control the lumber yards and lumber
market of Benham.  As it was, he must wait and probably see others
appropriate ideas which he had suggested by his novel and brilliant
operations.  The prophecy indeed proved true, and Emil saw with a
morose eye what he called his harvest gleaned by others.  This
vindictive attitude toward the successful was the invariable frame of
mind into which he relapsed when he was not carrying everything before
him, and as a result those in the trade presently began to speak of him
as a crank.  His quick comprehension was admitted, but his associates
shook their heads when his name was mentioned, and hinted that he was a
dangerous man, who would bear watching.  It was almost inevitable that
a lean period should follow Emil's series of clever undertakings.
Toward the end of the second year, he found himself in a position where
he had not the means to enlarge the scope of his operations.  His
working capital was locked up in sundry purchases which he had expected
would show quick profits, but which hung fire.  If he liquidated, it
must be at a loss, and the idea of a loss was always bitter to him.
During a number of months he was obliged to renounce certain plans
which he had in view and to remain inactive.  A falling lumber market
added to his complications.  Prompt to act when he was convinced of
error, he sold out at last his accumulated stock at a loss, which would
have been much greater had he delayed a week longer.  But he was left
almost in the same position as when he started; the previous profits
had been cut in two.  This was wormwood to his restless soul.  It made
him moody and cynical at home, where one child and the near advent of
another foreshadowed increasing expenses.  He had expected by this time
to be on the high road to fortune, and to be imitating the swift
progress of certain individuals in Benham, who even in the short period
since he had been a citizen, had risen by their superior wits from
poverty to affluence and power.

But Emil's fits of depression were invariably succeeded by intervals of
buoyancy.  Though he still talked bitterly at home of the methods by
which cold-hearted capital squeezed the small man to the wall and
robbed him of his gains, he began to scheme anew, and to argue that the
assets in his control were still ample for a great success if shrewdly
handled.  The lumber market was in the doldrums, dull and drooping.  It
began to look as though some of the industries of Benham had been
developed too rapidly, and as though a halt, or what financiers call a
healthy reaction in values, were in order.  Could it be possible that
all prices in Benham were inflated?  The idea occurred to Emil one day,
and he jumped at it eagerly.  It took possession of him.  He feverishly
began to examine statistics, and found that Benham had experienced only
one period of depression since its birth as a city at the close of the
Civil War.  It was time for another, and the men who were clever enough
to anticipate it would reap the reward of their sagacity.  What were
the staples of Benham?  Oil, pork, and manufactured iron.  These were
the industries which had given the chief impetus to the city's growth,
and were its great source of wealth.  Emil pondered the situation and
decided to sell pork short.  If a general shrinkage in values was
impending, the price of pork was certain to decline.  He had hitherto
felt so confident of making money in his own line of business that he
had never done more than cast sheep's eyes at the stock market or the
markets in grain, oil, and pork futures.  It had been his expectation
to try ventures of this sort as soon as his capital was large enough
for important transactions.  It was a favorite notion of his that after
he had acquired the first one hundred thousand dollars, he would be
able to quadruple it in a very short time by bold dealings in stocks or
commodities.  He knew now that he had merely to step into a broker's
office and sell pork in Chicago by wire.  It was a simple thing to do
and the shrewd thing, considering his own business offered no
opportunity at the moment for brilliancy.

To speak to his partner seemed to Emil unnecessary.  He promised
himself that after he had put the firm on its feet again he would deal
generously with Robinson.  Since their late reverses the partnership
was not borrowing much money, so its credit was not exhausted.  Emil
obtained from his bank as large a loan as he dared to ask for, and
began to sell pork short on the strength of the proceeds.  It was a
process which requires small capital at the outset.  That is, he had
simply to keep his margin good in case the pork which he sold rose in
value.  To begin with he sold only a few hundred barrels, and within a
fortnight the price fell smartly.  Not only the price of pork, but of
stocks, grain, and merchandise.  Emil congratulated himself.  Evidently
he was correct in his judgment that a period of lower speculative
values was at hand.  The proper thing would be to sell everything and
reap a huge fortune before the dull general public awoke to the truth.
His own limited resources forbade this, which was irritating.  Still,
he could go on selling pork short, and this he continued to do.

The proceeding elated him, for the sudden and large profit was in a
sense a revelation.  He regretted that he had never before tried this
method of demonstrating his business shrewdness.  He felt that it
suited him admirably.  He would be no rash-headed fool; he would sell
boldly, but intelligently; he would keep his eye on the general market,
and not cover his shorts until the general situation changed.  If a
serious decline in the prices of everything were in store for
Benham--and the indications of this were multiplying from week to
week--the price of pork might drop out of sight, so to speak, and he
win a fortune as a consequence.  It was the chance of a lifetime.  He
reasoned that he would keep cool and make a big thing of it; that a
small fellow would be content with a few thousands and run to cover,
but he intended to be one of the big fellows.  Why take his profit when
the whole financial horizon was ominous with clouds, and money was
becoming tighter every day?

Emil's reasoning was perfect.  The course of prices was exactly as he
had predicted; that is, the price of everything except pork.  The
unexpected happened there, and this from a cause which no shrewd person
could have foreseen.  One day when, in the parlance of trade, the
bottom seemed to be dropping out of all the markets, a despatch
appeared in the newspapers stating that a peculiar disease had broken
out among the hogs in Western Illinois.  The pork market stiffened, but
became flat at the advance after somebody declared the story to be a
canard invented by the bulls to bolster up their holdings.  Emil,
adopting this explanation, and certain that this cunning stratagem to
check the decline would prove unavailing, sold more pork.

A week later--one Saturday preceding a Monday which was to be a
holiday--there were rumors in Chicago, just before the close of the
Exchange, that the disease among the hogs was no mere local
manifestation; that it was spreading rapidly, and had already shown
itself in Indiana and Ohio.  Pork in the last fifteen minutes bounded
upward and closed ominously strong.  Before the market opened on the
following Tuesday it was definitely known that the hogs of the country
were in the grasp of an epidemic, the precise character of which, to
quote the press, was not yet determined, but which, in the opinion of
those most competent to judge, would render the flesh of the animals
attacked by the dread disease unfit for food, and their lard
unwholesome.  When the market opened, the price of pork was so high
that Emil's margin of protection was wiped out as thoroughly as the
tide wipes out the sand dyke which a child erects upon the beach.  He
was unable to respond to the demand made on him for money to keep his
account with his broker good, and was sold out before night at a
loss--a loss which left him in debt.  He went home knowing that he was
bankrupt, and that his firm must fail the moment his note at the bank
became due, even if the broker to whom he owed five thousand dollars
over and above his margins did not press him.  There was no escape from
ruin and humiliation.

He disclosed the truth to Constance with the repressed bitterness of a
Prometheus.  He explained to her with the mien of a wounded animal at
bay the cruelty of the trick of destiny which had crushed him.  How had
he been at fault?  He had been shrewd, far-seeing and prompt to act.
The wisdom of his course had been demonstrated by the fall in prices.
He was on the high road to fortune, and fate had stabbed him in the
back.  Could any intelligent man have foreseen that the hogs of the
country would be stricken with disease?  And more galling still, why
had luck played him false by singling out the only possible combination
of events which could have done him harm?

"An all-wise Providence!" he ejaculated with a scornful laugh.  "A man
looks the ground over, uses his wits and is reaping the benefit of his
intelligence when he is struck in the head with a brick from behind a
hedge, and is then expected to glorify the hand which smote him.  How
could it have been helped?  How was I to blame?" he reiterated with a
fierce look at his wife.

Constance could not answer the question.  The details of business were
a sealed book to her.  The brief account of the disaster in pork, which
he had just given, was confusing to her, and had left her with no
conviction save pity for her husband.  She was ready to take his word,
and to believe that this overwhelming misfortune was the result of
ill-luck which could not have been guarded against.  What was uppermost
in her mind was the impulse to help and comfort him.  It pained her
that he should inveigh against fate, though she recognized that the
provocation was severe.  But he needed her now more than ever.  She
would be brave and let him see that her love was at his command.

"You mustn't mind too much, Emil," she said.  "We have to start again,
that's all.  I can economize in lots of ways, and we shall manage
somehow, I'm sure.  We have the house, you know.  If it's necessary--in
order to set you up in business--we can mortgage that.  We've always
had that to fall back on."

She knew as she spoke that from the standpoint of prudence the offer of
the house was unwise.  If that were gone, what would become of her
children?  Yet she felt a joy in tendering it.  Why did her husband
look at her with that malevolent gaze as though she had contributed to
his distress?

"If you had put a mortgage on the house when I first started in
business, and had given me the benefit of a larger capital, then we
shouldn't be where we are to-day.  I wanted it at the time, but you
didn't offer it."

"Oh, Emil.  I never dreamt that you wished it.  To mortgage our home
then would have been rash, surely.  Besides, if I had given it to you,
wouldn't it have been lost with the rest now?"

"Don't you understand," he said, roughly, "that if I had not been
hampered at the start by my small capital, I should never have been
forced to go outside the lumber business in order to support my family?
Another five thousand dollars would have made all the difference."

His glowering look seemed to suggest that he had persuaded himself that
she was partly to blame for what had happened.  Constance was ready to
make every allowance for him, but his mood offered fresh evidence of
the crankiness of his disposition, a revelation to which her devotion
could not altogether blind her.

"I don't understand anything about the business part," she answered,
putting her arm around his neck.  "Oh, Emil, Emil, I'm so sorry for
you!  I wish to do everything I can to help you and show my love for
you.  This is a dreadful sorrow for you to bear--for us both to bear.
But it has come to us, and we mustn't be discouraged.  God will give us
strength to bear it if we let him."

"God?" he blurted.  "You may leave God out of the question so far as I
am concerned."

"Oh, Emil, it grieves me to hear you talk like that."

"And it grieves me that you should aggravate my trouble by cant which I
thought you had outgrown."

"I shall never outgrow that," she murmured, appreciating suddenly that
the substitute which he offered her for spiritual resignation was a
cell bounded by four stone walls.  She had reached the limit of her
apostacy, and she shrank irrevocably from the final step.

"Of course the rich and the powerful and the fortunate," he was saying,
"encourage the delusion that if a man's knocked out as I am he ought to
believe it's for the best, because rubbish of that sort keeps together
the social system on which they fatten.  Do the poor in the tenements
in Smith Street over there," he asked with a wave of his hand, "believe
it's for the best that they should go hungry and in rags while Carleton
Howard and his peers imitate Antony and Cleopatra?  Ask the operatives
in the factories across the river what they think of the justice of the
millionaire's God?  The time has passed when you can fool the
self-respecting workingman with a basket of coals and a tract on the
kingdom of heaven.  They may have their heaven, if they'll give us a
fair share of this earth."  Emil folded his arms as one issuing an
ultimatum.

Constance realized that he was in no mood to be reasoned with.  She had
made clear that she could not subscribe to his doctrine of despair, and
save in that respect she was eager to be sympathetic.  She could not
deny the inequalities and apparent injustice of civilization, and
Emil's plea that he had been crushed by an accident which he could not
have avoided not only wrung her heart, but filled it with a sense of
hostility to an industrial system which permitted its deserving members
to be crushed without fault of their own.  But she felt instinctively
that the best sort of succor which she could bring was of the practical
kind.  To-morrow was before them, God or no God, and they must adjust
themselves to their altered circumstances, take thought and build their
hopes anew.

She put her arm around his neck again and kissed him silently.  Then
she began with quiet briskness to make preparations for the evening
meal.  It was the maid's afternoon out, and Constance moved as though
she were glorying in the occupation.  Presently she said:

"Of course I'll dismiss Sophy to-morrow.  I am proud to be a
workingman's wife, Emil.  We'll soon be on our feet again, never fear."

The suggestion of the servant's dismissal deepened the gloom on Emil's
face.  "I've half a mind to pull up stakes and move to New York," he
muttered.

"And give up our home?"

He frowned at the involuntary concern in her voice.  "What use is a
home in a place where a man is cramped and circumvented in every big
thing he attempts?  I ought to have moved long ago."

"I am ready to live wherever you think best, Emil.  And you mustn't
forget, dear, that my trust and faith in you are as great as ever."

Despondent as he was, his habit of buoyancy was already groping for
some clue to a brighter vision, to which his wife's words of
encouragement now helped him.  He was sitting with his elbows resting
on the table and his head clasped between his hands.  "I'll make a
fresh start--here," he said.  "They've got me down, but, damn them,
I'll show them that they can't keep me there."

Presently he arose, and walking out to the kitchen reappeared with a
goblet and two bottles of beer.  One of these he uncorked and poured
the contents ostentatiously so that the froth gathered.  Raising the
glass he buried his mouth in the beer and eagerly drank it off.  He set
down the goblet with a sigh of satisfaction.

"And what's more," he said, "they can't deprive me of that."

Constance watched him with a troubled look.  She shrank at this time of
his distress from intimating that she regarded the indulgence of this
appetite as a poor sort of solace.  Besides, a glass of beer was in
itself nothing, and he might well take offence at her solicitude as an
invasion of his reasonable comfort.  Yet observation had taught her
that he was becoming more and more fond of seeking a respite from care
in liberal potations of this sort.

She restrained her inclination to interfere, but she saw him with
concern consume four bottles in the course of the evening.  The
serenity of temper which this produced--the almost indifferent calm
following the storm--was by no means encouraging.  To be sure his ugly
side seemed entirely in abeyance.  Indeed, he took down his fiddle and
played on it seductively until he went to bed, as though there were no
such things as business troubles.  But somehow the very mildness of his
mood, gratifying as it was to her from the momentary personal
standpoint, disturbed her.  Was this good nature the manly, Christian
resignation of the victim of misfortune putting aside his grief until
the morrow?  It suggested to her rather the relaxation of a baffled
soul exchanging ambition for a nepenthe of forgetfulness--a fuddled
agitator's paradise--and her heart was wrung with dread.




V

The firm of Stuart & Robinson, lumber dealers, was hopelessly insolvent
and did not attempt to resume business.  The partners separated with
sentiments of mutual disdain.  To the junior--the dummy--the failure
had come as a cruel surprise.  He refused to regard Emil's conduct as
reasonable or honorable, despite the assurance that the speculation in
pork had been for their common benefit, and that, but for an untoward
accident, the result would have been a fortune for the firm.  On the
other hand, Emil expressed scorn for a nature so pusillanimous that it
saw only the outcome and failed utterly to appreciate the brilliancy of
his undertaking.  As Emil explained to his wife, the decision of the
partners in regard to the future was typical of their respective
dispositions; Robinson, having lost his money, was soliciting a
clerkship--a return to servitude; whereas Emil intended to strike out
for himself again.

In what field of energy were his talents to be exercised next?  This
was for Emil the first and most important consideration.  His new
employment must be of a kind which would provide him with bread and
butter until he was on his feet again, but would not deprive him of
scope and independence.  It must be something which would not require
capital.  Yet this did not mean that his talent for speculation was to
be neglected, but merely to be kept in abeyance until he saw just the
opportunity to use to advantage the three thousand dollars which he
promptly raised by a second mortgage on his wife's house.  His failure
had left him more than ever confident of his ability to achieve success
by bold and comprehensive methods.  But in the meantime, while he was
spinning the web of fresh enterprises which were to make him
prosperous, he must support his family somehow.

He concluded to become a newspaper reporter and writer of articles for
the press.  This would provide an immediate income and would not
interfere unduly with other projects.  Besides it would enable him to
give public expression to some of his opinions, which would be an
æsthetic satisfaction.  He also engaged desk-room in an office shared
by four men independent of one another and interchangeably petty
lawyers, traders and dealers in mortgages and land.  On the glass door
one read "Real Estate and
Mortgages--Investments--Collections--Loans--Notary Public."  Below were
the names of the occupants, followed by the titles of several wildcat
companies, the dregs of oil and mining ventures in the neighborhood of
Benham, of which one of them was the promoter and treasurer.  It seemed
to Emil a location where he, hampered by circumstances from jostling
elbows with men of means, might use his wits profitably until he could
see his way to more imposing quarters.  Here he would be unobserved and
yet not wholly out of touch with what was going on.  On the same floor
of the building, which was a hive of small concerns, there was a
broker's office which had a wire to Chicago and knowing correspondents
in New York.  That it was described as a "bucket shop" by more
prosperous banking firms prejudiced Emil in its favor; he ascribed the
stigma to capitalistic envy and social ostracism.  He became friendly
with the proprietor, discussed with him the merits of the wares on his
counter, and presently, acting on "tips" obtained from this source,
captured on several occasions sums ranging from ten to fifty dollars by
the purchase of ten shares of stock or an equivalent amount of grain,
requiring an advance on his own part of not more than three per cent.
of the purchase price--a mere bagatelle.  This as a beginning was
satisfactory.  It eked out his journalistic income; and the skill with
which he plied the process, contrasted with the folly displayed by most
of the customers, flattered the faith which he had in his sound
judgment.  This broker's shop was the resort of scores of people of
small means, trades-folk, clerks, salaried dependents and some women,
keen to acquire from the fluctuations of the speculative markets a few
crumbs of the huge gains garnered by the magnates of Wall Street, of
which they read emulously in the newspapers.  To put up one's thirty
dollars, and to have one's margin of venture or profit wiped out within
twenty-four hours, was the normal experience, sooner or later, of
ninety per cent. of these unfortunates.  The remainder were shrewder
and longer lived, and to this remnant Emil indisputably belonged.

He obtained a position on the _Star_, a sensational, popular one-cent
paper.  The _Star_ was read both by the workingmen in the manufacturing
plants, of whose interests it was a zealous champion, and by a large
class of business men and trades-people, who found its crisp paragraphs
and exaggerated, inaccurate reports of current horrors and scandals an
agreeable form of excitement.  Emil's employment was to make the round
of the dealers in grain, lumber, wool and other staples and report
trade prices and gossip, which under the control of the financial
editor he was allowed to expand into commercial prognostications or
advice.  To the Sunday edition he began to contribute special articles
exploiting the grievances of the proletariat, which the management of
the _Star_ accepted and presently invited as a weekly feature.  They
were written with a sardonic acerbity of touch, which afforded him an
outlet for his disgruntled frame of mind and free scope for his
favorite theories.  He also renewed his attendance at the Socialistic
Club which he had frequented before his marriage, and became one of the
orators there.  It occurred to him that a political office would be
acceptable while he was husbanding his resources.  Why not become
alderman on the workingman's ticket?  There was a salary of five
hundred dollars attached, and as a city father he would have
opportunities to know what was going on in municipal affairs, and to
get an inkling of some of the big schemes projected by capitalists, for
the furtherance of which his vote would be required.  He would be able
also--and this was an exhilarating consideration--to hold the whip-hand
over the arrogant moneyed men seeking franchises for next to nothing,
by which to extort millions from the guileless common people.  While
Emil, with recovered buoyancy, readjusted his plans to meet his
circumstances and set his wits to work, his wife met the necessity of
strict economy with absorbed devotion.  She signed the mortgage with a
pang, but without hesitancy.  She appreciated the necessity of the
contribution.  Without ready money Emil would be powerless--must become
a mere clerk or subordinate, and his ambition would be crushed.  She
would have preferred perhaps that he should resign himself to the
situation, and without imperilling their home, support his family on a
modest footing by a salary or by the journalistic work for which he had
an aptitude.  But she recognized that his heart was set on independent
success on a large scale, and that Emil thwarted or repressed would
become an irritable and despondent malcontent.  His shrewdness had
nearly gained him a fortune, and apparently a cruel freak of chance had
been solely responsible for his discomfiture.  She did not pretend to
criticise the nature of his business dealings.  He had explained to her
that capital was indispensable to the realization of his aims.  She
must trust him.  She did suggest that he should use the proceeds of the
mortgage for the payment of his debts.  The thought of doing so was
bitter, and she was thankful when Emil assured her with a protesting
scoff that such a proceeding would be Utopian.  "What," he asked, "was
the sense of insolvent laws, if, when a man failed in business, his
wife was to cast her little all, her own patrimony, into the common pot
for the enrichment of his creditors?  Business people understood that
they were taking business chances, and did not expect to gobble up the
home of a wife bought with her own genuine means.  If she were rich,
generosity might be honesty, but in the present instance, it would be
sentimental folly."  This was convincing to Constance, for she felt
instinctively that her children must have rights as well as the
creditors.  A woman's whimsical conception of business honor might well
be at fault.  She had made her offer, and she was glad to abide by her
husband's superior knowledge.

Her duty obviously was to reduce the scale of family living without
interfering with Emil's reasonable comfort or wounding his
self-respect.  She gave herself up to her work of domestic economy with
fresh zeal, doing the manual labor of the household with enthusiasm.
By steady industry and thoughtful care, she was able not only to
minimize expenses, but to produce presentable results from a small
outlay.  Her heart was in it; for was not Emil at work again and
hopeful?  She was proud of his newspaper articles and regarded his
small gains from shrewd speculations as new proof of his capacity for
financial undertakings.

The end of a year found Emil rather more than holding his own
pecuniarily.  He had obtained commissions as a broker from the
successful negotiation of a few small real-estate transactions, his
ventures on a cautious scale in the stock market had been almost
invariably fortunate, and his earnings as a newspaper writer had been
sufficient with these accretions to cover his household expenses, pay
the interest on the mortgage, and add slightly to his capital.  He felt
that he was on his feet again, and was correspondingly bumptious; yet
he realized that his recuperation regarded as progress was a snail's
pace, which must be greatly accelerated if he would attain wealth and
importance.  In this connection the idea of becoming an alderman kept
recurring to him with increasing attraction.  At present he was nobody.
His name was unfamiliar and his position obscure.  This irritated him,
for he craved recognition and publicity.  To be sure, while capital was
at his disposal, he had seen fit to address his efforts solely to the
accumulation of a fortune as the passport to power, but even then he
had been at heart a sworn enemy of the moneyed class.  And now that he
had resumed his old associations, his theories had developed fresh
vitality and aroused in him the desire to vindicate them by action.
Since fate had condemned him to attain financial prominence slowly, why
should he not secure recognition in the best way he could?  As an
alderman he would be a local power, and once in the arena of politics
and given the opportunity to make himself felt, why might he not aspire
to political prosperity?

He proceeded to seek the nomination.  But he found that there were
other aspirants, and that he must be stirring.  In Benham the district
system of election was in vogue.  That is, the city was divided into
municipal districts, and each district chose its own alderman.  In that
where Emil lived the workingman's candidate, so called, was almost
invariably successful against the representative of the more
conservative element of the two wards concerned, and a nomination was
regarded as equivalent to election.  Now there were two factions of
voters belonging to the dominant party in the district, one in each
ward, and for three successive years the alderman had come from the
ward other than that in which Emil dwelt.  This was a plausible
argument why the next candidate should be selected from his ward.  The
faction which Emil hoped to represent contained a considerable number
of Germans with socialistic affiliations, and it was agreed by a
conference of the rival cliques on the eve of the canvass that their
turn had come to nominate a candidate.  This was fortunate for Emil, as
some of the members of the social debating club to which he belonged
were of this body.  He had already been prominent at the meetings of
the club, prompt and aggressive in the expression of his opinions on
his feet, and prone to linger over his beer until late at night
agitating the grievances of the under dogs of industrial competition.
The suggestion of his name, backed by a vote of his associates,
received respectful consideration from the political managers, and he
at once became a prominent candidate.  The last three aldermen from the
district had been of Irish extraction, and he was an American.  His
grandfather on his mother's side had been a German; hence his name
Emil.  He was an undoubted advocate of the rights of the laboring
class, and a foe of capitalistic jobbing.  These were signal points in
his favor.  But the victory would remain to the aspirant who could
obtain a majority of the delegates to the aldermanic convention, and
the battle would be fought out at the preliminary caucus where the
delegates were chosen by the voters of the two wards.  Accordingly the
contest became a house-to-house canvass of the district by the
respective candidates, each of whom had an organization and
lieutenants.  There was speech-making at halls hired for the occasion,
and some treating incident to these rallies.  Poster pictures of the
candidates were requisite for use in saloons and on bill-boards.  All
this demanded expenditure.  Emil realized presently that, if he wished
to succeed, he could not be niggardly with his money.  Men would not
work for nothing, and spontaneous enthusiasm was only to be had for
remuneration.  He drew upon his funds, exhausting the little he had
saved the previous year, and trenching slightly on the mortgage money.
He hoped to win.  The contest practically was between him and a German
beer manufacturer, who happened also to be the president of a small
bank.  The third candidate was already out of the running.  Emil in his
capacity as tribune of the people made the most of his opponent's
connection with the moneyed interests.  His satire on this score offset
the advantage which his rival received from his trade as a brewer, and
turned the scale.  On the night of the caucus, the voting booths were
crowded to repletion.  A stream of excited citizens struggled to the
rail to deposit their ballots.  There was imprecation and several
resorts to fisticuffs.  Not until after midnight was the result known.
Emil won by a liberal margin in both wards, and his nomination was
assured.  He was escorted home jubilant and beery by a detachment of
his followers, whose cat-calls of triumph thrilled the listening ears
of Constance.  She met him at the door, and when he was safely inside
she threw her arms about his neck and exclaimed, "Oh, Emil.  I'm so
glad!"

His small dark eyes were scintillating, his hair stood up from his brow
like a bird's crest, the curl of his short mustache, odorous of malt,
bristled awry, his speech was thick.

"Didn't I tell you they couldn't keep me down?  I shall get now where I
belong," he exclaimed as he strode into the sitting-room and dropped
into a chair with the air of a fuddled but victorious field-marshal.

Constance recognized that he was exhilarated by drink.  The
associations of the last few weeks had awakened in her vague doubts as
to the sort of influence which the career of an alderman was likely to
exercise upon him.  But she shrank from harboring criticism.  She
yearned to be happy, and her happiness was to see her husband
successful and prosperous.  So she put away the consciousness that his
breath was tainted, his manner boastful and jarring, and gave herself
up to the joy which sprang from beholding him a self-satisfied victor.

Emil's self-satisfaction was short lived.  It chanced that some of the
wealthy citizens of Benham were interested in the establishment of an
electric street-car system for the city and its suburbs, and were
laying their wires to secure the co-operation of the Board of Aldermen.
The project had been kept concealed, and not until the campaign for the
city election was well under way were the machinations of those
interested apparent.  First as an underground rumor, then as a
well-credited report from diverse sources, the news reached Emil that
the nominee of the other party had the backing of a powerful syndicate.
The true explanation of this mystery followed, and with it the
statement that Emil's radical utterances had drawn upon his head the
ire of the capitalists with a mission, who were giving their moral and
financial support in every district to the one of the two candidates
best suited to their necessities regardless of party.  In place of the
walk-over he had expected, Emil found himself in the midst of a contest
of the fiercest description.  He was furious, and his exultation was
turned to gall.  Why had he not discovered the street-car company
projects in advance and made friends with the promoters?  This was his
first and secret reflection, which added rancor to his public
declaration that he would bury at the polls the candidate of these
plunderers.  But how?  Where were his funds to come from?  There had
been plenty of offers of ready money when it was supposed that his
election was assured.  But now the tone of his supporters was less
confident, and ugly rumors reached him of defections among the Irish in
the other ward.  He was in the fight to stay.  So he declared on the
stump and in his home.  He could not afford to be defeated.  It was a
case of hit or miss, win or lose.  Maddened, desperate, and excited, he
threw prudence to the winds and scattered dollars freely for
proselytizing expenses until the morning of the election.  Each side
claimed the victory until the polls were closed.  The result was
close--a matter of one hundred and fifty ballots--but Emil proved to be
the loser, and at a cost of over three thousand dollars.  The fund
which he had borrowed from his wife was exhausted, and he had incurred,
besides, a batch of unpaid bills for refreshments, carriages, and other
incidental expenses.

He awoke at dawn from a nap at a table in a saloon from which the last
of his followers had slipped away.  Slouching into his kitchen, where
his wife was kindling the fire, he tossed his hat on the table and said
with a malignant sneer:

"The jig's up."

Constance was pale.  She had been watching for him all night, and had
heard from a neighbor the dismal result.  Her heart was wrung with pity
and distress, but she perceived that it was no time for consolatory
words.  She busied herself in preparing a cup of coffee, which
presently she placed before him, stooping as she did so to kiss him
softly on the forehead.  He was sitting by the table with his legs
thrust out and his hands sunk in his trousers pockets, chewing an
unlighted cigar, one of those left from the supply he had bought for
political hospitality.  His wife's action seemed to remind him of her
presence.  He looked up at her viciously, showing the white of his eye
like a surly dog.

"What do you want?"

"Your coffee, Emil."

He glared at the smoking cup, then with a sweep of his arm dashed it
away:

"To hell with you and your messes, you--you fool!"

The crash of the crockery was followed by silence.  It seemed to
Constance that she had been struck by a bullet, so confounding were his
words.  Her husband address her like that?  What did it mean?

"Emil," she gasped--"you are ill!"

"Not ill, but tired of you."

"Of me?  Your wife?  What have I done?"

"Why didn't you consent to move to New York when I wished to go?" he
snapped.  "If you had, I wouldn't be in this fix, sold out by a pack of
filthy Hibernian cut-throats."

"I was ready to go if you wished it, Emil.  We will go now--if only you
do not speak to me so unkindly."

"It's too late," he replied with a sneer.  "What use would it be,
anyway?  We look at everything differently.  We always have."

"You do not realize what you are saying.  You do not know what you are
saying."

"Crazy, am I?  The best thing for you to do is to ask some of your
church philanthropists to supply you with laundry work.  You're likely
to need it.  The jig's up, I tell you.  We haven't a dollar left."

"Very well."

"The mortgage money with the rest."  He threw the chewed cigar on the
floor and ground it with his foot.

"Very well.  I can bear anything except that you should speak to me so
cruelly.  Have I been afraid of work?  Whatever has happened we mustn't
forget the children, Emil.  We must keep up our courage on their
account at least."

He scowled at the reference.  "I'll look out for the children.  Is
there any beer in the house?"

"No."  Then after a moment's hesitation she added, "May I ask you
something, Emil?  Won't you give up beer?  It is hurting your life.  I
am sure of it.  I have felt so for some time, and you have known that I
have hated your fondness for it.  Give it up altogether and--and we
will go to New York or anywhere you wish and make a fresh start."

In her dismay at his brutality she was eager and thankful to throw the
responsibility for his conduct on his propensity for drink.  She felt
the obligation to speak fearlessly on this score, even though she
irritated him.  Her gentle remonstrances had been of no avail, and she
must struggle with him now against himself or lose him altogether.

Emil heard her appeal with a deepening scowl.  For a moment it seemed
as though he were about to strike her.  Then, as what he evidently
considered the audacity of her expostulation worked on his mind,
self-pity was mingled with his anger.

"You'd deprive me of my beer, would you?  The only solace I've got.
Why don't you go smash my fiddle, too?  That's the way with you pious
women; a man gets down on his luck and you stop his comforts and drive
him into the street.  Very well, then, if I can't get beer in this
house, little saint, there's lots of places I can.  This is the last
straw."  Thereupon he strode out of the house, closing the kitchen door
behind him with a vicious bang.

VI

Constance did not see her husband again for twenty-four hours.  He
returned at supper-time and took his place at the table without a word
of apology or explanation.  He was in a state of great depression,
morose and uncommunicative.  On previous occasions when misfortune had
befallen him, he had taken his wife into his confidence, but now it
seemed either that he had lost his grip on life so completely that
words failed him, or that the resentment which he had expressed toward
her was still dominant.  When the meal was over, he went out and did
not return until late.  He was boozy with drink, and threw himself on
his bed with the air of a man who would fain dispel consciousness by
the luxury of sleep.

Emil's mode of life for the next few weeks was substantially a
repetition of this programme.  Glum, sour, and listless he went his way
in the morning; fuddled, indifferent, and sleepy he returned at night.
Concerning his circumstances and plans he said nothing to Constance.
She was left totally in the dark as to the extent and the effect of his
reverses.  He had told her that they were ruined, yet he continued to
go down-town as though nothing had happened.  Trusting that he would
enlighten her of his own accord, at first she asked no questions.  Then
as he did not speak, she requested him one morning to tell her how his
affairs stood, urging her solicitude and affection.  He listened
frowningly and put her off with the disconcerting utterance "You'll
know soon enough.  It's just as well to let a drowning man grasp at
straws while there are any to grasp at."

His half-scornful, half-desperate manner forbade further inquiry at the
moment if she did not wish to widen the breach between them.  Constance
was in deep distress.  She yearned to comfort and help him, but this
wifely, loving impulse was haunted by the consciousness now forced upon
her with painful clearness that she had misjudged his nature and was
mated to a crank.  How otherwise could she interpret his hostile
attitude toward herself?  To what but a cross-grained perversity of
soul could she ascribe his disposition to blame her for his
misfortunes?  Her duty was plain, to make the best of the situation,
and to ignore, so far as self-respect would permit, his laceration of
her feelings, trusting to time to restore his sense of justice and
renew concord between them.  But what hope was there for the future?
Hope for the realization of that blissful, ennobling married state to
which she had looked forward as a bride and had believed in store for
her?  Here was the thought which tormented her and gave poignancy to
the dismay and anxiety of the moment.  Even if their immediate
circumstances were less serious than Emil had declared, was there any
reason to believe that his next experiment would be more successful?
She had accepted hitherto without question his declaration that
ill-luck had been responsible for all his troubles, but that
consolation was hers no longer.  She found herself listening to the
voice of criticism to which until now she had turned a deaf ear.  In a
new spirit, without bitterness, but in the assertion of her right as a
wife to judge the man to whom she had committed her happiness, she
recalled the incidents of their married life--his theories, arguments,
and point of view.  He had declared her to blame for his misfortunes.
Surely if she had failed in her duty it had not been toward him.  She
had sacrificed her opinions to his, and for his sake abnegated her most
precious predilections in order to make the union of their lives
sweeter and more complete.  If she were guilty, was it not of treason
to her own instincts and her own conscience?

Emil indeed had persuaded himself not merely that fortune had betrayed
him, and the hand of the prosperous world was against him, but that his
wife was partly to blame for it.  Looking back on his last fiasco, he
conjured up the circumstance that she had not fallen in with his
suggestion of an exodus to New York, and this he had promptly distorted
into a grievance, which grew the more he nursed it.  To the notion that
she had thwarted him in everything and that their relations as husband
and wife had been wholly unsympathetic was only another step.  It
suited him to feel that he was the injured party, for he was face to
face with the responsibility of supporting his family, which must be
met or avoided.  The question of immediate funds was already pressing.
His last reverse had discouraged and angered him, but it had not
diminished his confidence that he would succeed in the right place.  It
had only convinced him that Benham was not the right place; that Benham
was too small and provincial; too unappreciative of real ability.  He
was unpleasantly in debt, but the bills which he had contracted for
political expenses could be disregarded for the present.  He had no
property with which to meet them, and if he were pressed, he had merely
to go into insolvency in order to rid himself of them altogether.  Nor
need he worry about the mortgage for the present.  It would not be due
for two years, and, provided the interest were paid, they could not be
molested.  These redeeming features of his plight were clear to him
after the first days of mental agitation, but his spirit did not
reassert its wonted elasticity.  Analyzing the cause, he perceived that
his whole surroundings were repugnant to him, and that he shrank from
recommencing life at the foot of the ladder under the conditions in
which he found himself.  He was determined to leave Benham, and he was
determined that his family, if they came with him, should toe the mark.
What this phrase meant precisely he did not formulate, but it suited
his mood.  "Toe the mark."  He kept repeating it to himself, as though
it promised relief from domestic insubordination.  Yes, if his wife did
not choose to adopt his theories and abet him in his undertakings, she
could go her own way for all he cared.  It was only on account of the
children that he did not put an end to their contract of marriage
to-morrow by leaving her.  Except for them it were surely folly for a
man and woman whose ideas were utterly at variance to continue a
partnership the only fruit of which could be discord and
recriminations.  So he argued, and it was only the thought of his
children which restrained him from precipitate action and caused him to
continue to go down-town every day seeking a bare livelihood.  Since
the night of his defeat at the polls, Constance had not asked him for
money.  Presumably she had some laid by, and was living on that, but by
the first of the month she must have recourse to him or starve, and
then would be the time for his ultimatum.  The terms of this, beyond a
declaration of general discontent, were still hazy in his brain,
befogged by malt liquor and inflamed by hatred of the world, but a
glowing conviction that their marriage had been a failure through her
fault was a satisfactory substitute for definiteness.  Brooding like a
spider in its web, secretive, hoping that something would turn up to
put him on his feet again, yet almost reckless in his attitude, and
drinking assiduously, he drifted on without aim.  His evenings were
spent at his workingmen's club, where he continued as an outlet to his
feelings to deliver virulent philippics, which he realized as he
uttered them were a sorry equivalent for personal success.

While thus limp and embittered, a final mishap impelled Emil to action.
It happened that the broker on the same floor as the office where he
had desk-room, and with whom he was on familiar terms, let him in for a
disastrous tip and put the screws on when the market went the other
way.  The sum involved was three hundred dollars, the total residue of
Emil's capital, which he had allowed to remain untouched with this
false friend in order not to be entirely without the means to
speculate.  The advice offered had seemed to be friendly and
disinterested.  When the result proved disastrous the victim promptly
suspected guile.  Certainly he encountered a flinty demeanor, as though
the proprietor of the "bucket-shop" were cognizant of the impecuniosity
of his customer and had decided to squeeze him dry and break with him.
This from the man whose social status on the street he had championed
seemed to Emil rank ingratitude.  Yet the broker was making no more
than ordinary business demands upon him.  His margin was exhausted, and
the transaction would be closed unless he supplied additional security.
This was business-like, but not friendly, as it seemed to Emil,
especially as the ingrate, who had been so confident of the value of
the tip, chose now to be sphinx-like as to what the next day's price of
the stock would be.  All he would vouchsafe was that it would go up
sooner or later.

Since it was necessary to act at once, and to sell meant the loss of
the remnant of his capital, Emil concluded to give himself a chance by
making use of five hundred dollars which had just been paid over to him
for a client in redemption of a mortgage.  He argued that the stock,
having fallen in price contrary to expectation, was not likely to
decline further at once, and that if he protected his account, he would
be able to make inquiries and form a more intelligent opinion by the
end of a few days as to what he had best do.  Besides, there was
lurking in his mind the bitter argument, which he chose to believe
sound, that the world owed every man a living, and assuredly owed it to
a man like himself.  Since the hand of society seemed to be against
him, why should he not take advantage of the resources at his disposal
and save himself?  He was simply borrowing; if he were not able to
return the money at once, he would do so later with interest.  The
consequences of this performance were disastrous.  As Emil had
predicted, the stock in question remained stationary for three days,
but by the end of them he felt no clearer regarding which course to
pursue.  Estimates as to its value were contradictory; yet since a sale
at the market price meant the safety of the five hundred dollars at the
cost of his own financial obliteration, he remained hopeful.  On the
fourth day the stock broke sharply, and again on the day after.  His
holding was only one hundred shares--a paltry transaction from a
capitalistic point of view--yet it was rashness for him.  Adversity and
his pressing needs had tempted him to disregard his meditated prudence
and to venture on thin ice.  He perceived himself ruined and a
defaulter.  The obliquity of his peculation was mitigated in his mind
by the conviction that fortune had been signally cruel to him.  As for
the borrowed money, he would give his note and pay it presently when he
was on his feet again.  Yet he appreciated that his opportunities for
making a living in Benham were at an end, and that if he remained, he
might find difficulty in inducing the owner of the five hundred dollars
to accept him as a creditor without demur.  Clearly the simplest course
was to come to terms by post.  To shake the dust of Benham from his
feet was his dearest wish, and the time had arrived for its fulfilment.
There was still one hundred dollars belonging to his client in his
hands which he had not used.  This he drew to provide himself with
travelling expenses, arguing that the sooner he were able to reach New
York, the quicker the loan would be repaid, and slipped from the city
without a word to anyone.  He had decided to cut adrift from all his
past associations, and an indispensable portion of his plan was to
sever forever his relations with his wife.

A week later he wrote this letter to her from New York:


    Constance:

    This is to let you know what has become of me.  You may have
    guessed the truth, but it's woman's way to worry, weep, and raise a
    hue and cry, though she knows in her heart that she's mismated, and
    that it would be a godsend to her if "hubby" had really blown his
    brains out or were safely at the bottom of a well.  I'm not dead
    yet, nor am I contemplating suicide at present.  Though if the time
    ever does come when I think the game is played out, it will be
    one-two-three-go! without any pause between the numbers.  But I'm
    as good as dead now, so far as you are concerned.  You won't be
    troubled by me further.  You've seen the last of me.  I told you I
    was strapped.  I'm cleaned out to the last dollar.  But that
    doesn't phaze me except for the moment.  I'm going to make a fresh
    start and a clean sweep at the same time.  You know as well as I
    that our marriage has not been a glittering success.  In short,
    we've made a mess of it.  We thought we were suited to each other,
    and we find we're not.  That's all.  I don't approve of you any
    more than you do of me, and what's the use of making each other
    miserable by protracting the relation until death do us part?  It's
    up to me to undo the Gordian-knot, and I've cut it.

    You'll shed some tears, I suppose, over the situation, and your
    friends will call me a brute.  But when the shock is past and
    sentimental considerations have evaporated, just ask yourself if
    I'm not doing the sensible thing for us both.  We don't look at
    life in the same way and never will.  I'm a radical, and you're a
    conservative, and we were misled before marriage by the affinities
    of flesh to suppose that oil and water would harmonize.  From the
    point of view of law I'm the offending party, and you'll be a free
    woman to sue for divorce on the ground of desertion, by the end of
    three years.  In the meantime, you can go back to your kindergarten
    work or whatever you see fit.  You have your health, and your
    philanthropic church friends will enable you to support yourself.

    The only hitch is the children.  If you had been ready to follow me
    to New York when I first suggested it, we might not be separating
    now.  I expect and am anxious to provide for them.  If you will
    send them on to me, they shall want for nothing.  But if you are
    bent on keeping them, as I foresee may be the case, the
    responsibility is yours.  I should like one at least--preferably
    the boy.  If you insist on keeping them both, I can't help myself.
    There's where you have the whip-hand over me.  But don't delude
    yourself with the notion that I don't love my own flesh and blood
    because I'm not willing to live with their mother.

    There will be no use in your coming on here or trying to find me.
    I have made up my mind.  We could never be happy together, so the
    fewer words said about parting the better.  Send your answer
    regarding the children to the New York post-office.  I shall expect
    it for a week.  The money you loaned me is gone with the rest, but
    they can't turn you out of your house until the mortgage is due, if
    you pay the interest.  Some day I shall pay it back to you.  I wish
    you well, and consider I'm doing us both a service in cutting loose
    from you.

    Good-by, EMIL.


It seemed to Constance when she had finished this letter as though her
heart would stop.  Was this reality?  Could it be that her husband was
abandoning her and her children in cold blood, treating the sacred ties
of marriage as lightly as though they were straws?  Alas!  his cruel
words stared her in the face, freezing her soul, which had been sick
for days over his unexplained absence; sick from dread.  Yes, she had
guessed; but she had put the horror from her as impossible, despite his
hints.  Unbalanced and embittered as he was, he could not be so unkind.
Now she was face to face with certainty; there was no room for hope.
It was true; so cruelly inhumanly true that her brain felt dazed and
numb.  She gazed at his writing stony-eyed and appalled, limp with
dismay and forlornness.  To avoid falling she put out her hand to the
table, and the contact of her own flesh served to readjust her
consciousness.  Seating herself she swept her fingers across her brow
to rally her senses, and read the letter again slowly.  Then
mortification succeeded dismay, and resentment followed close on
mortification.  The wounded pride of the wife, the indignation of the
mother protesting for her children asserted themselves, causing her to
flush to the roots of her hair and her pulses to tingle.  Coward!
Unnatural father!  What had she done to deserve this?  What had they
done, helpless innocents?  Give them up to him?  Her children, now the
only joy of her life?  Never.  They could not both have them.  Why
should he who had left them in the lurch have either?  She could hear
their prattle in the adjoining room, poor little souls, unconscious of
their misery.  Then her sense of wounded pride and her anger were
forgotten in the agony of a possible separation from her offspring, and
in the loss of her husband's love, and her tense nerves gave way.  "Oh,
Emil, my husband, how could you?" she moaned, and burying her face in
her hands she let sorrow have full sway.

[Illustration: "Oh, Emil, my husband, how could you?" she moaned]

When she had dried her eyes she was prepared to face the situation and
to think more calmly.  Certain points were now clear.  Emil was right;
since he had ceased to love her, they could never be happy together.
So far as she could see, she had not been at fault, though he had
persuaded himself that she was to blame.  She would never have left
him; but now that he had deserted her, she could dare to admit that
their souls were not in accord, and that her love and respect for him
had been waning in spite of herself for many months.  She would not
attempt to follow him, and she desired to retain both the children.
Was it her duty to let Emil have one of them?  Here was the only
harassing point in the plans for the future which she was formulating.
Would it be fair to the children to separate them?  Would she be
justified in keeping them both, in view of the affection which their
father had professed for his own flesh and blood?  As Emil had
declared, he and she had made a mess of their marriage, and they were
to separate.  Was it fair to him to keep both the boy and the girl?
Ah, but she could not bear the thought of giving up either.  She felt
the need of counsel.  To whom could she turn?  Who were her friends?
She thought of Mr. Prentiss, and she remembered her husband's taunt
concerning her philanthropic church friends with a sense of shrinking.
The church offered itself as a refuge to all in the hour of distress,
but it seemed to her as though she would rather starve than apply to
Mr. Prentiss.  Not that she was afraid of starving.  That side of the
situation had no terrors for her.  She was almost glad at the idea of
supporting herself and her darlings, and she had entire confidence in
her ability to do so, even though she were forced to scrub floors.  But
she yearned for the sympathy and advice of a friend.  How lonely she
had suddenly become in this large, busy city!  Emil had evinced little
desire, especially of late, to make friends in the neighborhood, and
she had been so absorbed in her home and her husband's interest that
she had disregarded her social opportunities.  He had been apt to speak
slightingly of their acquaintances as people whom he would soon
outstrip in the struggle of life.  And now she was the poorest of the
poor, the saddest of the sad, one of the lowly common people for whom
her doctor father's heart had ever cherished fond and patient sympathy.
She was one of them now herself.  How different had been her dreams and
her ambition.  To think that she, Constance Forbes, had come to this--a
wife abandoned by her husband, alone and friendless, with only the
semblance of a roof to shelter her and her children.  But all this was
nothing if only she need not part with either of her babies.  She would
be able to support them, never fear, and with them to support she could
be brave, even happy.  But without them?  No, no, Emil had forsaken
her, she had lost her faith in him, he was not worthy of the sacrifice;
she dared not trust him; he had no right to either.  She could not, she
would not let either go.

When the morning came she was more firmly of the same opinion, and she
composed this reply to her husband:


    Emil:

    I have your letter and my heart is filled with sorrow.  I cannot
    compel you to live with me against your will.  God knows I have
    tried to be a loving, dutiful, and sympathetic wife, but it seems I
    have failed to please you.  It is true that our ideas of how to
    live and what is right are very different.  I have been aware of
    that in my secret soul, but for your sake I did my best to adopt
    your point of view.  Now I shall be free to follow my own.  Since
    you no longer love me, I am not sorry that we are to live apart,
    for I can see now that I have suffered much on your account.  But I
    do not choose to reproach you.  What good would it do?  Besides you
    are the father of my children--poor little things.  I do not think
    that I should have written to you at all if it were not for the
    question what is to become of them.

    I am trying to do what is best for them and to be just; just to you
    and to myself.  I have decided to keep both the children.  They are
    babies still, and need a mother's love.  A father's too, but it
    seems they cannot have both.  Let God judge between us, Emil.  They
    are my flesh and blood too, and it is you who are forsaking us, not
    we you.  As you say, I have my health and we shall not starve.  I
    am not afraid.  There is nothing more to say, is there?  It has all
    been a dreadful mistake--and we thought we should be so happy.
    Good-by.  In spite of everything I shall always think of you kindly.

    CONSTANCE.


Having despatched this she felt as though she would be glad to die.
Life seemed so flat, and her condition so humiliating.  Her love for
Emil was dead; the union of their souls was broken; what was there to
look forward to?  Yet she knew that she must not stop to repine or to
indulge in self-pity.  The stern necessity of winning bread for her
children confronted her and must be faced at once and resolutely.  In
this she must find happiness and fresh inspiration.  It was her duty to
close the ears and eyes of her soul to the voices and visions of the
past.  Hard work would save her brain from giving way, and hard work
only.  What should that work be?  What was she to do?  In the first
glow of her pride, revolting at the slight which her husband had put
upon her, the way had seemed easy, but viewed in the sober light of
reality it bristled with difficulties.  Yet now, as she pondered and
realized what failure would mean, her spirit rose to meet them, and
immediate needs forced sorrow to the background.

Where was she to find work?  Since the receipt of her husband's letter
everything outside her own emotions had been a blank to her; her gaze
had been solely introspective.  Conscious now of the need of action and
of renewing her contact with the world, she took up the newspaper,
yesterday's issue of which lay unopened on the table, and began to
examine the page of advertisements for employment.  She must find at
once something which would provide her with ready money.  Only through
friends and only after delay could she hope to obtain a kindergarten
position; it would take time and instruction to learn typewriting; she
was not sufficiently proficient in languages or music to offer herself
as a teacher.  She could become a domestic servant or a shopgirl.  In
the former case it would be necessary to board out her children, to
give them to some institution, perhaps, a prospect which wrung her
heart; in the latter she could be with them at night, but who would
look after and guard them during the day?  What did other women do
whose husbands ran away and left them?  The long list of people out of
work was appalling, and few of the opportunities offered seemed to fit
her circumstances.  Someone was seeking employment as a seamstress.
She might take in sewing.  This perhaps was the most feasible
suggestion.  She was handy at plain sewing, and a little practice would
doubtless render her skilful.  Yes, she would try this, and in order to
obtain a start would solicit work from some of the neighbors, if needs
be.  The neighbors?  They did not know as yet of her misfortune--her
disgrace, for it was a disgrace to be forsaken by her husband.  It
would be necessary to tell them.  What should she say?  Entertaining
sadly this necessity of an avowal, she glanced over the rest of the
newspaper, and came suddenly upon a paragraph which informed her that
her misfortune was already public.  Prefaced by offensive headlines,
"Emil Stuart disappears from Benham!  What has become of Mrs. Morgan's
mortgage money?" the wretched story stood exploited to the world.
Constance read and the cup of her distress and humiliation overflowed.
It needed only this insinuation of dishonesty to complete her misery.
Her husband an embezzler?  Where should she hide her head?  Nor was
there comfort in the reporter's closing effort at euphemism: "One or
two acquaintances of the late candidate for aldermanic honors, when
apprised of his mysterious disappearance, expressed the belief that his
seeming irregularities would be explained to the satisfaction of all
concerned; but a gentleman, whose name we are not at liberty to
disclose, hazards an opinion, based on personal observation, that Mr.
Stuart has been premeditating this step for several weeks, and is a
fugitive from justice.  The circumstance that his wife and two children
have been left behind in Benham invites the further inquiry whether he
has also abandoned his family.  There are rumors that Mr. Stuart's
domestic relations were not altogether harmonious."

Constance let the newspaper slip from her hands.  Her cheeks burned
with shame.  This was the last straw.  Her husband a defaulter, and her
relations with him the subject of common newspaper gossip.  As she
stood spell-bound by this new phase of misfortune the door-bell rang.
A visitor.  Who could it be?  Some sympathetic or curious neighbor who
had read of her calamities.  Or more probably the writer of the
newspaper article coming to probe into her misery in search of fresh
copy.  For a moment she thought that she would not answer the call, and
she waited hoping that whoever it was would go away.  Again the bell
rang, this time sharply.  It might be something important, even a
telegram from Emil to clear himself.  Picking up the newspaper she
concealed it hastily, then stepped into the passage and opened the door
slightly.

"May I come in?" asked a strong, friendly voice.

"Oh yes, Mr. Prentiss; excuse me," she faltered.  She had recognized at
once who her visitor was, but so many bewildering things had happened
that she stood for a moment irresolute, refusing to credit her own
senses.  As she opened wide the door, the clergyman strode in
fearlessly as though he realized that the situation must be carried by
storm.  Entering the parlor, he put out his hand and said with manly
effusion:

"I have come to ask you to let me help you, Mrs. Stuart."

"Sit down, please.  You are very kind.  I----"

Her words choked her, and she stopped.

"I saw by the newspaper yesterday that you were in trouble.  I do not
wish to pry into your affairs, but I thought that you might be glad of
the counsel of a friend."

His visit was precious balm to her spirit, but, despite her gratitude,
the knowledge that he was heaping the traditional coals of fire on her
head made her uncomfortable.  She had choked from mingled relief and
mortification.  But now her finer instinct responded to the kindness of
his words and she said with simple directness: "I should like to tell
you everything, Mr. Prentiss.  My husband left a week ago.  He does not
intend to return.  I have a letter from him, and he--he does not wish
to live with me any longer.  He was willing to support the children,
but I could not make up my mind to let them go.  Our money is all gone
and this house is mortgaged.  If you will help me to find work so that
I can support them and myself, I shall be very grateful.  It was very
good of you to come to see me."

The children, attracted by the voice of a stranger, had run in and
stood one on either side of their mother staring at him shyly with
cherubic eyes.  The clergyman said to himself that here was a veritable
Madonna of distress--this lithe, nervous-looking woman with her slim
figure and soulful face.  How pretty and neat she looked in spite of
her misery!  How engaging were the tones in which she had set forth her
calamity!  He had always admired her, and it had been a disappointment
to him that she had strayed.  There was almost jubilation in his heart
as he heard that she was free from the wretch who had pulled her down;
and though he intended to temper the ardor of the priest by the tact of
a man of the world, he could not entirely restrain his impulse to
stigmatize her husband.  "I see," he said.  "You are much to be pitied.
It is a cruel wrong; the act of a coward.  But you must not take your
trouble too much to heart, Mrs. Stuart, for the man who will leave a
sweet wife and tender children from mere caprice is no real husband and
father."

"Mr. Stuart has had much to worry him of late.  He has lost money, and
been unfortunate in politics."  Her impulse was to apologize for her
husband even then.  "I cannot understand though how he could leave us,"
she added.  After all why should she a second time on Emil's account
set her face against the truth in the presence of this true friend?
Emil was a coward, and his act was a cruel wrong.

But Mr. Prentiss had recovered his aplomb.  "I will not distress you by
talking about him; he has gone.  The matter with which I am concerned
is how to help you.  We must find you employment at once."

Constance regarded him gratefully.  "That is my great requirement just
now, Mr. Prentiss.  I need work to keep my children from starving and
to help me to forget.  I am not afraid of work.  I shall be glad to do
anything for which I am fit."

"I understand, I understand.  It is the pride of my church to help just
such women as you to help themselves.  You need give yourself no
concern as to your immediate pecuniary needs.  They will be provided
for.  I will send the Deaconess to you at once."

The directness of his bounty, the plain intimation that she was a
subject for charity brought a flush to her cheeks.  But she knew in an
instant that it would be false pride to protest.  There was no food or
money in the house.

"Thank you," she said simply.

Mr. Prentiss divined her reluctance and appreciated the delicacy of her
submission.  He recognized that this woman with wistful brown eyes and
nervous, intelligent face was no ordinary person--was even more
deserving than he had supposed, and his thoughts were already busy with
the problem of her future.  He must find just the right thing for her.
"I know, of course, that you wish to become self-supporting as soon as
possible," he said.  "Will you tell me a little more about yourself and
your capabilities?  You came to Benham a few months before your
marriage to fit yourself to be a kindergarten teacher, if I remember
aright?"

During the momentary pause which preceded this inquiry her conscience
had been reasserting itself.  She had longed for counsel and here it
was.  If she had erred, there was yet time to repair her fault.
"Before we talk of that, may I ask you one question, Mr. Prentiss?  I
wish to know if you think it was selfish of me to keep both the
children.  I desire to do what is right this time, whatever it cost
me."  She clasped her hands resolutely in her lap as though she were
nerving herself for a sacrifice.  "I hope you will tell me exactly what
you think."

The clergyman's heart warmed at this revelation of spiritual vigor.
"Here is a soul worth helping," he reflected.  Then, in answer to her
appeal, he exclaimed with righteous emphasis: "Ask your own heart, my
dear woman.  Would you dare trust these babies to your husband's
keeping?  This is a problem of right and wrong, and demands a severing
of the sheep from the goats.  You may banish that doubt forever."

Constance dropped her eyes to hide the tears of satisfaction which had
sprung into them at his words.  Her children were safe.  The counsel
given was the very echo of the test by which she had justified herself
toward Emil.  "Excuse me," she said in apology for her emotion.  Then
looking up she added with tremulous brightness, "I felt that I must be
sure before anything else was decided.  And now to answer your question
as to my own capabilities: I have none.  I am eager to learn, and I
have had some education--my father was fond of books and had a
library--but I tell you frankly that there is nothing but the simplest
manual work for which I am fitted at the present time.  I have thought
that all over."

"So far so good.  Much of the trouble of this world proceeds from the
inability of people to discern for what they are not fitted.  Can you
sew?"

"I can do plain sewing satisfactorily."

"We will begin with that then.  It will keep you busy for the time
being.  Meanwhile I shall have an opportunity to consider what you had
best undertake."  He rose and put out his hand with spontaneous
friendliness.  "Good-by.  God bless you.  You are a brave soul, and He
will not desert you or leave you comfortless."

Constance quickened at the firm pressure, and her own fingers
acknowledged the interest which it expressed.  She looked into his eyes
with frank confidence.  "You have come to me at a time when I needed
someone more than ever before in my life.  I shall never forget it."

Mr. Prentiss nodded and turned to go as though he would disclaim this
expression of everlasting obligation.  He felt that he was about his
Master's business, and was seeking neither thanks nor praise.  Yet,
while he deprecated her gratitude, her entire mental attitude caused
him ethical and æsthetic satisfaction.  The conviction that this ward
of the church was worth saving and helping gave elasticity to his step
and erectness to his large figure as he strode up the street, knocking
now and again some bit of orange peel or other refuse from the sidewalk
with a sweep of his cane, which suggested a spirit eager to do battle
in behalf of righteousness.




VII

Two days later the Rev. George Prentiss dined at the house of another
of his parishioners, Mrs. Randolph Wilson.  She was a widow of about
forty-five, the sister of Carleton Howard, reputedly the wealthiest and
most sagacious of Benham's financial magnates, and a generous
benefactress of St. Stephen's.  Her bounty had enabled the rector from
time to time to carry out his cherished plans for the æsthetic
adornment of the church property.  The reredos, two stained-glass
windows, and the baptismal font in the enlarged edifice had been
provided by her; and in the matter of charity she never failed to
respond by munificent subscriptions to the various causes in aid of
which he appealed to his congregation.  They were friends and allies;
interested mutually in St. Stephen's, and interested also, as they both
liked to feel, in promoting American civilization outside of church
work.  Her house, or palace, as it should more properly be termed, a
counterpart to that of her brother's which adjoined it, stood in the
van of progress, in Benham's fashionable new quarter beyond the River
Drive.  No pains or expense had been spared to make these mansions
impressive and magnificent.  Architects of repute had been employed to
superintend their construction, and their decorations and furnishings
had been chosen in consultation with persons whose business it was to
know the whereabouts of admirable objects of art, and to tempt
impecunious noble families abroad to exchange their unique treasures
for dazzling round sums of American gold.

Mrs. Wilson could fairly be termed the leader of social activity in
Benham, if such a term be compatible with the institutions of a country
where every women is supposed to be a law unto herself.  Fashions, in
the narrow sense of clothes, are in America set by the dressmakers, but
what Mrs. Wilson wore was always a matter of moment to women who wished
to be in style.  She dressed elegantly, and she was able to take
liberties with the dressmakers, doing daring things with colors and
materials which justified themselves, yet were so individual that they
were liable to make guys of those who copied her.  Consequently, her
wardrobe had a distinction of its own which proclaimed fashion yet
defied it.  Yet her clothes, striking and superb as they often were,
constituted only a small part of her social effectiveness.  Her
gracious finished manners, and quick, tactful intelligence were the
agents of a spirit perpetually eager to be occupied and to lead, and
which had found a labor of love in directing what may well be called
Benham's æsthetic renaissance.

For Benham's evolution had been no mere growth of bricks and mortar,
and no mere triumph in census figures over other centres of population.
Even more remarkable and swift than its physical changes had been the
transformation in the point of view of its citizens.  Twenty years
earlier--in 1870, when Mr. Prentiss was a young man just starting in
the ministry--he had been one of a small group of earnest souls
interested in awakening the public to a consciousness of the paucity of
their æsthetic interests, and to the value of color as a stimulating
factor in the every-day life of the community, and as such he had often
deplored the aridity of Benham's point of view.  In those days the city
was virtually a hot-bed of republican simplicity and contempt for
social refinements so far as all but a very small percentage of the
inhabitants was concerned.  Those who built houses larger and finer
than their neighbors were few in number and were stigmatized, if not as
enemies of the institutions of the country, as purse-proud and
frivolous.  Hotels were conducted on the theory that what was good
enough for the landlord was good enough for the guest, and that
malcontents could go elsewhere.  In matters appertaining to art,
hygiene, education or municipal management, one man's opinion was
regarded as equal to any other's, provided he could get the job.
Special knowledge was sneered at, and the best patriots in the public
estimation were those who did not distrust the ability of the average
citizen to produce masterpieces in the line of his or her employment by
dint of raw genius untrammelled or unpolluted by the experience of
older civilizations.  Though solid business men wore solemn-looking
black frock-coats and black wisp ties in business hours, to dress again
in the evening was looked at askance as undemocratic.  It would have
been considered an invasion of the rights of the free-born citizen to
forbid expectoration in the street cars.  Suggestions that the vicious
and unregenerate adult pauper poor should not be herded with the young,
that busy physicians should cleanse a lancet before probing a wound,
and that sewage should not be emptied into a river used as a source of
water supply, were still sniffed at by those in charge of public
affairs as aristocratic innovations unworthy the attention of a
sovereign people.  Architectural beauty both within and without the
house was disregarded in favor of monotonous sober hues and solid
effects, which were deemed to be suggestive of the seriousness of the
national character.

While deploring some of these civic manifestations, Mr. Prentiss had
appreciated that the basis of this æsthetic sterility was ethical.
When less discerning persons had attributed it solely to ignorance and
self-righteous superficiality he had maintained that a puritanical, yet
moral and sincere, hostility to extravagance and display was
responsible for the preference for ugly architecture and homely
upholstery and decoration, and that conscience was the most formidable
obstacle to progress.  As a priest of a church which fostered beauty
and favored rational enjoyment of the fruits of the earth, he had never
sympathized with this public attitude, but he had understood and, as an
American, respected it.

Now, in the twinkling of an eye, as it were, all was changed, and
Benham was in the throes of a revival; a revival which during the last
ten years had revolutionized Benham's architecture and Benham's point
of view.  The public had become possessed by the conviction that they
had outgrown their associations and that the standards hitherto revered
were out of date and unworthy of a nation and a city pledged to
enlighten the world, upon whom prosperity had been bestowed in large
measure.  The group of earnest souls who had dared to criticise seemed
suddenly to have become a phalanx--numerically unimportant, still, when
compared with the whole population, that seething army of industrial
wage-earners--but assertive and energetic out of proportion to their
numbers.  The city had become a hive of reforming activities.
Specialists in the arts and humanities were no longer classed as
traitors, but were welcomed by a growing clientage as safeguards
against bumptious individualism.  Though a cheerful optimism in regard
to the city's architectural merits still prevailed at large, a silent
censorship was at work; substituting, in the business quarter, new
mammoth structures adapted to modern industrial needs, erecting in the
fashionable quarter, by the aid of American architects trained in
Paris, well-built and individual-looking residences.  Instead of three
or four cheerless, barrack-like caravansaries with sodden cookery,
there was a score of modern hotels, the proprietors of which vied with
one another in their endeavors to lure patronage by costly and
sumptuous innovations.  There were comfortable and inviting
restaurants.  The slap-dash luncheon counter, with its display of
pallid pie and one cadaverous chicken, was waning in the popular
esteem, in favor of neat spas, at which the rush of patronage was
alleviated by clean service and wholesome fare.  There were eight
theatres, each more spacious and splendid than its predecessor.  A
frowsy black coat, worn in the forenoon, had ceased to be a badge of
patriotism or moral worth, and the community had become alive to the
values of spruceness, color, and comfort in matters of dress.  Not only
this, but on the streets of Benham there were many stylish equipages
with liveried grooms, and in the superb homes which the wealthy
citizens had established, there were grand entertainments, where
rivalry was rampant and money flowed like champagne.  And last, but not
least, there was Mrs. Randolph Wilson, the quintessence in her own
person of all that was best in this revival in favor of the beautiful
things of life, the living embodiment of this newly directed and
freshly inspired energy.  For well-to-do Benham and Mr. Prentiss liked
to believe that the impulse behind these materialistic manifestations
was conscience and aspiration, a reaching out for a greater human
happiness and a wider human usefulness than had been possible under the
old dispensation.  This access of lavish philanthropy and study of
charitable methods, this zeal of committees promoting new and more
thorough methods in hygiene and education, and all the phases of this
new awakening in quest of Christian beauty signified to him
Benham's--and hence American--originality and fervor refined and
spiritualized; Benham's enterprise and independence informed,
chastened, and fortified.

And yet there was another side to this whole matter which had haunted
Mr. Prentiss much of late, and which was in his thoughts to-night as he
sat smoking his cigar after dinner.  He had dined sumptuously.  Cool
oysters, soup of mushrooms, fish smothered in a luscious sauce, cutlets
of venison with French beans, little pyramids of _paté de foie gras_
encased in jelly, butter-ball ducks with a salad richly dressed, and a
confection of fruit, cream, and pastry, which was evidently a
gastronomic specialty of Mrs. Wilson's French cook.  He had tasted
everything; he had drunk two glasses of champagne, and been pleasantly
aware that the cup of black coffee, served after dinner, was an
entrancing concoction which his own kitchen did not afford; and he felt
that his repast had done him good.  It was for him an occasion.
Obviously it was for Mrs. Wilson an every-day affair.  Moreover, this
rich, delicious dinner, served by noiseless servants on choice china,
was in harmony with the rest of the magnificent establishment, in
harmony with the artistic scheme of color, the soft lustrous draperies,
the striking pictures and other masterpieces of art purchased for large
sums abroad, and Mrs. Wilson's beautiful toilette and exquisite
personality.  Here was luxury triumphant and compelling, yet unappeased
and seeking fresh opportunities for æsthetic delight; as witness a
Millet, an inlaid table, and a Japanese idol in the room in which he
sat, all new since he had dined there last.

What a vivid contrast all this to the cheerless often squalid homes
which he was accustomed to visit as a rector of Christ's church!  The
thought which haunted him was that one result of the city's marvellous
growth and development had been the accentuation of the distinctions
between rich and poor, between class and class in a community where,
until lately, there had been theoretically no classes.  To be sure he
had Mr. Carleton Howard's assertion that there was no country in the
world where the poor man was so well off.  This was very likely true,
but it did not affect the proposition that the rich were daily growing
richer and more self-indulgent.  What was to be the limit--the outcome
of this renaissance of beauty and comfort, which he had welcomed?  Had
not the æsthetic reaction almost reached the point where, both as a
priest of God and as a good American, it behooved him to cry halt
against luxury and extravagance?  He frowned at this last reflection
for the reason that he was painfully aware that he had fulminated
against this sort of thing from the pulpit for years, formerly as part
of the clerical formula championing the cause of the spirit against the
flesh, and latterly because the Aladdin-like growth of great fortunes
all over the land, and conspicuously in his own community, had often
suggested the comparison between the passage of a camel through the eye
of a needle and the rich man's entrance into the kingdom of heaven as
an appropriate text.  He had spoken with fervor and sincerity
concerning the responsibilities of those having great possessions, and
sometimes with living pictures in his mind.  Neither Mrs. Wilson nor
her brother had ever been among those for whom these admonitions were
intended.  They had opened their purse-strings liberally to every
meritorious cause.  The goodly size of their cheques was to him a
constant source both of satisfaction and astonishment--astonishment at
the new possibilities open to those interested in God's kingdom.

Yet, though he put from him as ungenerous and unnecessary any positive
criticism of his hostess, in the teeth of her many benefactions and her
personal activity in social undertakings, he could not help realizing
that, in spite of his utterances, the evil which he deprecated was
proceeding at a pace which suggested the course of wild-fire.  And the
worst of it was that he--the church--was so helpless.  Great fortunes
had been accumulated with a zeal which suggested the inevitable march
of destiny--a law which seemed almost to mock the spirit of
Christ--and, even while he was musing, the city had become a theatre of
industrial contrasts, with the pomp and pride of life in the centre of
the stage and poverty and distress in the ample background.  There
recurred to him the traditional image of the curate of his faith--the
Church of England--cringing before or patronized by the titled
worshippers of Mammon.  This, at least, he could resent as impossible
in his case--he had never hesitated to speak his mind to any of his
parishioners, however important--still, the reminder was disconcerting
and a challenge to his conscience.  Nor was the reflection that this
wave of luxury, this more and more exacting reverence for material
comforts, was a part of the movement of the century, and was common to
all civilized countries, a solace.  He was an American, but first of
all, he was a servant of the church, and the church was the beacon of
civilization.  Was she doing her work, if these terrible inequalities
were to continue?  What was to be the outcome of this zest for
luxurious personal comfort?

To what extent the church ought to take part in the economic
regeneration of the world was one of the questions which Mr. Prentiss
had always found perplexing.  He was well aware that his parishioners
as a body were not fond of hearing him preach on what they called
secular subjects.  So long as he confined himself to enumerating
spiritual truths, they were not averse to his illustrating his stigmas
upon sin by generalizations from current worldly abuses; but he knew
that many shook their heads and declared that the cobbler should stick
to his last when he ventured to discourse on political topics or the
relations of labor and capital.  Mr. Prentiss was not aware, however,
that some of this prejudice proceeded from the circumstance that he was
apt to lose his head on such occasions; but, on the other hand, much of
it was genuine disinclination for advice from the pulpit on subjects
which, to quote the women parishioners, were not spiritual, and, to
quote the men, were none of his business.  His congregation was almost
entirely composed of pew owners, people with vested rights, among which
appeared to be the right not to be harrowed by socialistic doctrines.
They were ready to help the poor in any way which he would suggest, and
they had supplied him with a mission church where he could reach the
ignorant and needy more effectively, but they argued that he had better
leave to the politicians all suggestions tending to disturb the
existing industrial order.

Mr. Prentiss sometimes sighed over these limitations, but he had become
used to them, and in a measure, with advancing years, he had, in his
endeavor to be a man of the world in order to remain a more useful
Christian, accepted the doctrine that he had no plan to substitute for
the present economic system, and that he must make the best of the
existing situation.  So, in practical, daily life, he exhorted the rich
to give their money and themselves to the advancement of their fellow
men, and the poor to shun vice and bear their privations with patience,
while he held forth the promise of the church of an existence hereafter
for the pure in heart where all the seeming inconsistencies of this
mortal life would be explained and justified.  Not being endowed with
much sense of humor, Mr. Prentiss, as he waxed in years, and St.
Stephen's became the fashionable church of the city, had found less and
less difficulty in accommodating himself to this point of view, and in
devoting all his ardor to reclaiming souls for Christ.  After all, was
not his mission to help men and women as he found them?  First of all
to minister to their souls, and in the name of Christianity to lift
them from the slough of human suffering and misfortune that he might
expound to them the loving mercies of the Lord?  The things of the
earth were not the things of the spirit, and he was more tenacious than
in his youth of the prerogatives of the church as an institution
controlling human consciences by standards of its own, founded on the
teachings of the Prince of Peace.  Nevertheless, being reasonably
clear-headed and fearless, he was not without the suspicion at times
that this reasoning was mystical, and in the face of facts he had every
now and then his unpleasant quarters of an hour.

This was one of them to-night.  His hostess, when the dinner was over,
had left him to a cigar and his own devices in the library.  He was to
join her presently and be shown her daughter's wedding presents.  He
had been invited to dine in order that he might see them, but Mrs.
Wilson and he both knew that this was an excuse for a quiet evening
together in which they might compare notes concerning their mutual
interests.  Reaching out to knock off the ash of his cigar into a
dainty porcelain wheelbarrow, he noticed a new photograph on the
mantel-piece and rose to examine it.  He recognized it as one of
Clarence Waldo, the New Yorker to whom Miss Lucille Wilson was
betrothed.  The sight of this young man's countenance did not serve to
restore Mr. Prentiss's serenity.  On the contrary, he stood gazing at
the photograph with an expression which suggested that his soul was
still perturbed.  The face was that of a man of twenty-seven or eight
with delicate features--thin lips, a long nose and an indefinable
haughtiness of expression which was made up of weariness and disdain.
He had large eyes which lacked lustre, and his sparse hair gave the
effect of having been carefully brushed.  The clergyman had met him
only a few times, and Mr. Prentiss had never forgotten the first
occasion, which was at Lucille's coming-out ball three years before.
He had happened to find himself in Mr. Waldo's path when the young man
was in the act of carrying everything before him with a plate of salad
for his partner, and he had never forgotten the cold impertinence of
the New Yorker's stare.  Paul Howard, Lucille's cousin, who witnessed
the encounter, said afterward that Clarence had given Mr. Prentiss the
dead eye, which was a telling description of the stoniness of the
fashionable New Yorker's gaze.  Mr. Prentiss had never heard this
diagnosis, but he had remembered the episode.  He regarded it, however,
merely as additional evidence of the lack of reverence on the part of
the young men of the day--and the young women, too, for the matter of
that--not merely for sacred things, but for everything and everybody
which were in their way or did not happen to appeal to their fancy.
But though he considered this absence of social politeness as one of
the cardinal failings of the age, his present thoughts regarding
Lucille's future husband were not concerned with it.

Since the engagement had been announced four months ago he had been
making inquiries, and the information which he had received was in his
mind and troubled his soul as a corollary of the other problems which
had just been haunting him.  It was not of a character to justify him
in forbidding the bans--not even in remonstrating with Mrs. Wilson,
unless she were to ask his advice or provide him with an opportunity.
But he deplored sincerely that this young man was to marry his friend's
daughter.  Was this to be the outcome, the crowning of the wealth of
love and solicitude which had been lavished on this only child--a child
brought up in his church?  Was it for this that Lucille had been made
the central figure of costly entertainments for the last three years,
in the hope that she might make a brilliant match?  Decidedly, it was a
puzzling world, and circumstances seemed to be conspiring to cloud his
horizon and disturb his digestion at a time when he ought to be
enjoying himself and taking his ease.

"What does he offer her?" he said to himself.  "Twelve months of
sporting life--American sporting life.  A superb stable, a four-in-hand
coach and steam yacht, polo, golf, the horse show, cards, six months
every third year in Europe, their summers at Newport, their winters at
Palm Beach.  The fortune which she will bring him will enable them to
live in the lap of luxury all the year round, and he will teach her to
regard those who are not rich and who do not imitate their manner of
life as beneath their notice.  I know the kind--I know the kind."

Soft footsteps interrupted his mental soliloquy.  "No, thank you," he
exclaimed in a tone which was almost militant to the waiters who
approached him with a tray.  Mr. Prentiss supposed that another form of
stimulant was being offered him, for Madeira, liqueurs and coffee had
been successively brought in and solemnly presented to him by the two
men servants, one of whom seemed to him as superfluous as a plumber's
helper.  Then as his gaze, which had been inward, appreciated that the
silver gilt tumbler contained apollinaris water, he called them back
and emptied the glass.  He had finished his cigar and it was time to
rejoin his hostess.




VIII

Mr. Prentiss continued his monologue on his way to the drawing-room.
He imagined himself saying to Mrs. Wilson, "You know that I believe in
toleration, and that I would not set or preach an ascetic standard of
life.  I believe--my church believes--that it is not profitable to the
human soul to mortify the flesh in every-day life or refuse to enjoy
the comforts of civilization.  But the set of people to which this
young man belongs are cumberers of the soil and a menace to society.
It is not merely a question of taste, but of Christian morals.  We have
nothing to do with other nations; our concern is with the social life
of this nation and whether we are to foster and encourage a
pleasure-loving, self-indulgent, and purposeless leisure class."

Yet though his thoughts thus shaped themselves in fervent words, he was
conscious that in the absence of a cue his lips must remain sealed.
There was a limit imposed by society on the priestly office which he
could not overstep without appearing officious, and thus weakening his
influence.  Were it a case of notorious dissipation or some palpable
fault or blemish, it would be his duty to speak.  But he had no such
data at his command.  Clarence Waldo was simply a fastidious idler,
pretentious, and indifferent to the vital interests of life.  It could
not even be charged that he was marrying Lucille for her money, as he
had a competency of his own.  They would be able to buy all the dogs
and horses in the country if they saw fit.  But his own tongue was
tied.  To all appearances Mrs. Wilson was content.  At the time she had
announced her daughter's engagement to him, she had said, in response
to his earnest inquiry if she were satisfied--said it with a blithe
smile, as though, on the whole, the best had happened--"I should have
been glad of course, if Lucille had chosen a man of conspicuous talent,
a future United States Senator or successful artist or author.  If she
had loved her lord, I should not have objected to a title, because,
after all, even to a free-born American, there is a certain
compensation in becoming the mother of dukes and regenerating an
ancient line.  But Clarence is well connected, and the child is in love
with him.  So long as she is happy, that is the essential thing."

Since then he had become better informed as to the young man's
tendencies.  But if Lucille was in love with him and her mother
acquiescent, what was there to do?  The church could not interfere
beyond a certain point without giving offence.

Mrs. Wilson was not in the drawing-room, but Mr. Prentiss caught a
glimpse of her at her desk in a smaller room which led out of it.  She
called to him that she was answering a note and would join him
presently.  The clergyman seated himself and picking up from a low teak
table beside him a paper-cutter fashioned on a Japanese sword hilt he
compressed his fingers on the handle as an outlet to his perplexity.
Had he been walking in the fields, he would have cut off the heads of
the dandelions with his cane.  Marriage was a sacrament, the most
solemn undertaking in life, yet how impossible it was to regulate
matrimony for others.  He glanced around the room admiringly.  Already
the musical notes of his hostess's voice had served to dissipate
partially the miasma of doubt which had been assailing him.  This main
apartment was one of a series of drawing-rooms, each furnished with an
exquisite magnificence suggestive of the salons of France in the days
of Louis XIV, save that there was a superabundance of artistic
furnishings; hence the sight was confused by the array of costly
tapestries, marbles, bronzes, china, and gilt or otherwise illuminated
ornaments which almost contended for space with one another, though the
rooms were of large proportions.  One feature of Benham's renaissance
was the ambition to outdo the past in size and gorgeousness, but Mrs.
Wilson's advisers had been animated also by the desire for artistic
success, and it was only in its wealth of material that their and
her--for she had been the leading spirit after all--performance was
open to criticism.  Here in Benham, where twenty years before the
horse-hair sofa was still an object of admiring regard in the homes of
the well-to-do, the desert had blossomed with the rose, and a veritable
palace had been established.  And, as Mr. Prentiss reflected, joining
his finger-tips across his waist-band, all this lavish expenditure
meant the return by the rich of accumulated wealth into circulation for
the benefit of those who labored for their bread, which was another of
Mr. Carleton Howard's telling truths.

The swift, animated, but noiseless glide of Mrs. Wilson into the room
and onto a sofa, from which she flashed at him a gracious, electric
look of attention with the words, "And now, my friend, I am entirely at
your disposal.  It was a note which had to be answered at
once"--restored Mr. Prentiss's serenity.  She was one of those pleasant
persons in whose presence the world seems justified.  When she entered
a room people were apt to pay tribute by a pause in whatever they were
doing, and she became the focus of attention.  The effect of her
graceful energy was largely responsible for this, suggesting the
forceful but silent sweep of a ship.  She had lost the figure and the
countenance of youth, but though her abundant crinkly hair was grizzled
no one ever thought of her age except to observe that she was handsomer
than as a younger woman.  She had never been a beauty; she was now a
distinguished looking, comely, and effective matron.  She was tall and
rather willowy, but not thin, with a proud, resolutely carried head, an
agreeable straight nose, short rather than long (her best feature) a
spirited, sympathetic smile, eyes fundamentally gray, which changed as
her thoughts changed, and ingratiating but elegant manners.  Her face,
notably the cheeks and lips, was a trifle full, suggesting dimples, and
possibly to the critical a too-manifest desire to please.  Her obvious
pose--which, though deliberate was entirely genuine--was to be
exquisite, sympathetic, and intellectual, and for the expression of
this range of qualities she had serviceable allies in her musical
voice, a bewitching way of showing just enough of her teeth, when she
became vivacious, and her ornamental clothes, which always suited her.
On this evening she wore an old-gold gown with jet and lace
accompaniments, an aigrette of crimson gauze with which the plumage of
her fan was in harmony, a band of magnificent pearls around her neck,
and on her breast, though such ornaments were not strictly in fashion,
a large brooch of fine workmanship containing a miniature of two
children of tender age.  Of these children one had died shortly after
the miniature was painted, the other was her daughter Lucille.  Her
soul was dedicated to two interests, her joy and ambition as a mother,
and to the cause of social human progress.

Mrs. Wilson had been for fifteen years a widow, and, though her husband
held a hallowed place in her heart, even she was conscious that the
broad scope of her present life dated from the period when, seeking a
refuge from her own grief and loneliness, she had welcomed diverse
social employment.  Her husband, Randolph, a hero and a colonel of the
Civil War, had claimed her on his return as a bride.  They were ardent
lovers, and they had never ceased to be so, certainly not in theory.
Some of Mrs. Wilson's knowing friends were fond of insinuating, when
the humor for gossip prevailed, that he had died just in time, which
was their way of intimating that she had outgrown him.  But these
dissectors of hearts did not perhaps sufficiently remember that her own
blossoming forth into the woman she now was had been subsequent to her
husband's death.  Nor did they take sufficiently into account the
bewildering course of events which had attended her progress.  Colonel
Wilson, a man of small means at the time of their marriage, had become
her brother's partner.  The properties in which he was interested at
the time of his death had subsequently proved so valuable that she had
found herself presently the possessor of a million, a sum which had
quadrupled in the keeping of her brother, Carleton Howard, one of the
most powerful financiers in the country.  Opportunity surely had waited
on her widening aspirations, enabling her finally to establish herself
in this magnificent home surrounded by all the æsthetic attractions and
many of the treasures of modern civilization.

Probably Mrs. Wilson herself had never sought to analyze the past by
the light of the present, realizing, as we all do, that life unbeknown
to us has halting-places which become, as we look back, the dividing
lines between what are almost separate existences.  Though at her
husband's death she had made no resolutions regarding the future, she
had never felt the impulse to marry again, so engrossing were the
concerns of motherhood and social responsibility.

"You spoke at dinner of wishing my assistance in some case in which you
are interested.  Will you tell me about it now before we look at the
presents?" Mrs. Wilson continued with smiling interest.

"Ah, yes."  Mr. Prentiss was glad to have this recalled to his mind.
There was no chance here for doubt or perplexity.  "It is rather out of
the usual run of charity cases.  The personality of the woman, I mean.
The circumstance that her husband has run away and left her penniless,
with two young children to support is, alas! only too common."

"Poor thing!  How can I be of service?"

"The woman--her name is Mrs. Stuart--notwithstanding her disastrous
marriage, seems to me distinctly superior.  She came to Benham some six
or seven years ago, and I knew her a little at St. Stephen's before she
was a wife.  Indeed, I married them, and made some inquiries at the
time concerning the husband's circumstances, but learned nothing to his
discredit.  She has found him to be a godless, unscrupulous person with
drinking habits, and recently he has deserted her on the grandiose plea
that they would be happier apart.  She will be happier; I am sure of
that; but I have been exercised as to how to enable her to become
self-supporting.  She is called to higher usefulness than scrubbing or
plain sewing, but though I have discerned in her capabilities and
refinement, she is not at present equipped for any active employment."

"Which only tends to show, my friend, that every woman"--Mrs. Wilson
paused an instant--"every woman who has not independent means of her
own, I mean, should be educated to be self-supporting--should have some
definite bread-winning occupation which would render her independent of
the man she marries in case he dies or misbehaves.  I was thinking the
other day that a society formed to advocate this doctrine before clubs
of girls as a condition of marriage would prove efficacious."

Mr. Prentiss nodded.  "It is certainly the duty of Christian society to
provide additional safeguards against the consequences of improvident
wedlock.  In this particular instance, the young woman plighted her
troth while she was studying to become a kindergarten teacher.  She was
a country doctor's daughter, and is gentle and refined, as well as
intelligent in appearance--one of those lithe, tense American
personalities in which the spirit appears to burn at the expense of the
body, but which, like the willow, bend but do not break under the
stress of life."

"She sounds interesting, and I do not see that she has been to blame.
We must raise a fund for her.  With how large a subscription shall I
head the list?"  Though Mrs. Wilson gave freely on merely charitable
grounds, she gave with more enthusiasm when the objects of her bounty
had not offended her sense of the social fitness of things.

The clergyman put out his hand.  "That wouldn't do exactly, I think.
She is not too proud to let us help her for a few weeks with coal and
groceries until she can earn for herself.  She realizes that she must
be sensible, if only for the children's sake.  She has an independent
simplicity of nature and clearness of perception which would stand in
the way, I fear, of her accepting a donation such as you have in mind;
though I should dearly love to allow you to pay off the encumbrances on
their house, which, owing to her husband's rascalities have eaten up
her little home--her patrimony.  But I am sure she would refuse."

"I see.  We should think less of her if she allowed herself to be
pauperized, much as I should enjoy giving her a deed of her home free
and clear--the mere thought of it causes me a thrill of pleasure.  But
the worst of such tragedies is that we are most powerless to aid those
who are most deserving."  Mrs. Wilson leaned back among her cushions,
and, drawing a pale pink rose from a bunch in a vase at her elbow, laid
it along her cheek and inhaled its fragrance.  "If she were an
undiscerning, common spirit with workaday sensibilities, as so many of
them are, she would not refuse, but--half the pleasure of giving would
be lost.  It is a privilege and the fashion to be charitable, but so
much of our charity consists in filling the mouths and clothing the
bodies of the wretched who will never be appreciably different or
strive to be different from what they are."

"The poor we have always with us," murmured the clergyman.

"Always.  The shiftless, dirty, unaspiring, unæsthetic poor.  The dregs
and lees of human endeavor.  We must feed and clothe them, of course,
and help them to help themselves, but sometimes I forget the pathos of
it all in the ugliness and squalor.  Consequently, when the chance to
do real good comes, it is a pity not to be able to lift the burden
completely.  What, then, can I do for this young person?"

"I have thought over her case for the last forty-eight hours, and have
come to the conclusion that, as she has no special training, her best
chance for employment is to learn short-hand and to use the typewriter.
I understand that women proficient in this vocation can usually secure
steady work at a fair wage.  Though Mrs. Stuart would be unwilling to
accept a direct gift of money, I feel confident that she would not
refuse to let us put her in the position to become
self-supporting--that is, defray the cost of the lessons necessary to
make her a competent stenographer or office clerk.  And I thought you
might be glad to pay for these lessons--a matter of six months or so."

Mr. Prentiss had taken up the paper-cutter again, and he passed the
flat of the metal blade across his palm as though he were smoothing out
his plan as well as the creases.

"Gladly," she responded.  "For as long as you desire.  And, perhaps,
when she has learned what is necessary, my brother may know of some
opening for her down-town."

"Very likely," answered Mr. Prentiss, with resonant acquiescence.  "The
same thought had occurred to me."

"And, in the meantime, since you tell me that she is competent and
refined, my secretary, who will have her hands full with the details of
the wedding, may be able to give her occasional errands to do.  You may
tell her to call when her plans are adjusted and to ask for me."

"Excellent.  And we shall both be your debtors."

Mrs. Wilson smiled graciously, showing the dimples in her cheeks.  The
demands made upon her for pecuniary aid were of daily, it might be said
hourly, occurrence.  Whoever in Benham was in search of money applied
to her, and the post brought her solicitations from all sorts of
people, among whom were the undeserving or importunate, as well as the
needy or humanitarian.  As lady bountiful, she purposed to exercise
intelligent discrimination in her charities, and she accepted thanks as
a tribute to that quality.

"Come," she said, rising, "I will show you the presents.  Only think,
four hundred of them, and so many beautiful things!  People have been
so kind.  Several of my brother's friends in New York have sent most
exquisite tokens--a necklace of diamonds and pearls from Mr. Fenton the
banker, a gold dessert service from his railroad ally, Mr. Kennard."

She led the way from the drawing-room suite into the hall, where
electricity in artistic guises illuminated the broad panellings, a
splendid Terriers and three or four bronze or marble statuaries of rare
merit, and up the stair-case to the next floor into what was known as
the morning-room--an apartment where Mrs. Wilson conducted her affairs
and did her reading and thinking.  This was a combination of study and
æsthetic boudoir.  There were seductive sofas and quaint capacious
chairs supplied with brightly colored cushions, and dainty draperies,
all in silken stuffs of patterns reminiscent of the Orient.  Art, in
its most delicate and spiritual forms, breathed from every object of
furniture or decoration; from the small pictures--some in oils, some in
water-colors--which merited and often demanded the closest scrutiny;
from the few vases of entrancing shape and hue, from the interesting
photographs in beautiful frames, from the curious and rare memorials of
travel and wise choice of what cunning fingers had wrought with
infinite labor.  As in the rest of the house, there was still too much
wealth of material, too much scintillation and conglomeration of color,
but the intent had been--and not without success--to produce a more
subtle atmosphere than prevailed outside, as of an inner temple.
Prominent in one angle stood Mrs. Wilson's desk, rose-wood, inlaid with
poetic gilt tracery, and littered with the correspondence of a busy
woman.  Books and other articles of daily use lying here and there
without effort at order gave to the room the air of being the intimate
abode of a human soul.  Opening out of this was a private music-room,
which was used by Mrs. Wilson and her daughter in preference to the
large music-room on the street floor intended for musical parties and
dances.  Here were the wedding presents, a dazzling array of gold,
silver, jewels, glass, china, and ornamental knick-knacks, tastefully
arranged on tables introduced for the purpose.  As they entered an
attendant withdrew into the hall.

"We have thought it more prudent to have a watchman on guard by night
and day," explained Mrs. Wilson; "for I suppose it is true, as one of
those ridiculous newspaper items asserts, that these gifts represent at
least one hundred thousand dollars.  By the way," she continued, with a
gentle sigh, "it is so difficult to know what attitude to adopt with
the newspaper people.  If one refuses them the house, their
sensibilities are hurt and they are liable to invent falsehoods or
write disagreeable paragraphs.  If they are allowed to inspect
everything, they publish details which make one's heart sick, and make
one appear a vain fool.  How is a person in my position to be courteous
toward the power of the press and yet to maintain the right to privacy?
Is not this superb?" she added, holding up a crest of diamonds in the
form of a tiara.  "My brother's present to Lucille."

"Beautiful--beautiful, indeed," murmured the clergyman.  The sight of
all these costly things was bewildering to his mind as well as to his
eyes.  "Ah, the press--the press, it is a problem, indeed.  We would
seem to have the right to individual privacy, would we not?  And yet in
this age of ours, pressure is so often used upon us to thrust our wares
into the shop-windows--as in my case, sermons for newspapers of the
most sensational class--on the plea of a wider usefulness, a closer
touch with the wilderness of souls, that it is difficult to know where
the rights of the public end as to what one has.  What would seem to be
vanity may often be only another form of philanthropy.  And yet----"

"And yet," interposed Mrs. Wilson, as she singled out an enchanting fan
of gold and ivory and the most exquisite lace and spread it for his
inspection, "why should I pander to the vulgar curiosity of the public?
It is none of their business."

"In a matter of this kind I quite agree with you.  If they could see
all these beautiful things, there might be some sense in it; but that
would be out of the question, of course."

"That will be the next step; our houses thrown open to the madding
crowd.  Six newspapers--two from New York--applied recently for leave
to see the presents.  I intended to refuse firmly, but to my
astonishment Lucille seemed disappointed.  It never occurred to me that
she would not hate the publicity.  She gave a little shriek and said,
'Mamma, how dreadful!' and then added in the next breath, 'Everybody
does it, and, as something is sure to be printed, might it not be
better to make certain that it's correct?'  A day or two later she was
photographed in her tiara, and from what has transpired since I fear
that the idea of publicity was not foreign to her thought.  My child,
Mr. Prentiss!  Only think of it!  One can never quite understand the
point of view of the rising generation.  I consulted Carleton, and he
grew successively irate, contemplative, philosophical, and weak-kneed.
In short, a week ago a reportorial woman, with the social appetite of a
hyena and the keen-eyed industry of a ferret, passed the forenoon in
the house and went away with a photograph of Lucille in the tiara.  And
what is worst of all, in spite of my humiliation at the whole
proceeding, I am decidedly curious to see what she has written."

The sound of voices in the morning-room broke in upon this confession.
"Ah, here you are, Aunt Miriam!  I have brought you an artistic
masterpiece with a felicitous biography of the distinguished heroine.
Behold and admire!"

The speaker was Paul Howard, Mrs. Wilson's nephew.  He advanced from
the doorway with radiant, teasing face, holding out a newspaper at
which he pointed delightedly.  At his heels followed Lucille and
Clarence Waldo, she protesting, yet betraying by her laughing confusion
that her indignation was half-hearted; he stalking with self-important
gravity save for a thin smile, the limit of his deliberate
contributions to the gayety of nations unless under the influence of
alcoholic conviviality.  At men's gatherings there was a stage in the
proceedings when Clarence Waldo became decorously mellow and
condescended--indeed, expected to be asked--to sing one of three or
four quasi-humorous ditties at his command, a function which he seemed
to regard as an important social contribution and for which he
practised in secret.  Also, after luncheon or dinner, he was liable to
lay down the law in loud tones in regard to current sporting affairs.
But his habitual manner was languid and his expression cold, as though
he feared to compromise himself by interest or enthusiasm.  He was very
tall.  In the centre of his crown was a bald spot.  He stooped
slightly, and, except among his intimates, looked straight before him
lest he might see someone whom he did not wish to know.  In the rear of
this family party came Carleton Howard, stepping firmly yet
deliberately, as he always did, as though he walked abreast of Time,
not tagging at her skirts like so many of his contemporaries--a fine
figure of a man approaching sixty, with a large body, but not
corpulent, a broad brow, a strong, defiant nose, iron-gray hair and a
closely cut iron-gray mustache, clear, fearless, yet reflective eyes,
and a mouth the pleasant tension of which indicated both determination
and tact.  He was smoking a cigar, and had come in from his own library
to enjoy the bearding of his sister by the young people.




IX

Before Mrs. Wilson could ascertain what it was, Lucille made a dash at
the newspaper.  Paul thrust it behind his back.

"Give it to me, Paul," demanded the young woman, imperiously.  "I order
you to give it to me," she reiterated, tapping her foot.  "You are a
hateful tease."

[Illustration: "Give it to me, Paul," demanded the young woman
imperiously]

"Surely, my fair cousin, you're not going to deprive your mother of the
satisfaction of gazing on this work of art, and reading this
appreciative description of your personal charms?  Can you not see how
impatient she is to have it all to herself?"

"You have certainly whetted my curiosity, Paul," said Mrs. Wilson.

"I forbid you to show it to her."

"Why?"

"It is too ridiculous and foolish, and the picture--"  Her criticism on
that score instead of seeking words culminated in another spring, which
Paul evaded by wheeling spryly about so that he still faced her.

Paul Howard was an ornamental, attractive specimen of athletic,
optimistic American youth; a fine animal of manly, well-knit
proportions with no sign of physical weakness or of effeminacy in his
person or his face.  His countenance was open and ruddy; his eyes clear
blue, his hair light brown.  His lip was scrupulously clean-shaven,
exposing the full, pleasant strength of his father's mouth.  Indeed, in
conformity with the prevailing fashion among his contemporaries, he
wore neither mustache, beard, nor whiskers, as though in immaculate
protest against every style of hirsute ornamentation, from the
goat-like beard of Methodistical statesmanship to the spruce mustache
and well-trimmed whiskers of men of the world of fifteen years earlier.
He was a Harvard graduate; he had been on the foot-ball team, and a
leading spirit in the social life of the college; had been around the
globe since graduation, and spent nearly a year shooting big game in
the Rockies and getting near to nature, as he called it, by living on a
ranch.  All this as preliminary to taking advantage of the golden spoon
which was in his mouth at his birth.  At twenty-three he had signified
that he was ready to buckle down to the responsibilities of guarding
and increasing the family possessions, an announcement delighting his
father's heart, who had feared, perhaps, lest his only son might
conclude to become merely a clubman or a poet.  This was the fourth
year of his novitiate, much of which had been spent in New York, where
Mr. Howard, though his home was in Benham, had established a branch of
his banking-house, at the head of which he intended presently to place
Paul.  On the young man's twenty-fifth birthday the magnate had made
him a present of a million dollars so as to put him on his feet and
permit him to support a wife.  If this were a hint, Paul had taken it.
Though absorbed in financial undertakings of magnitude (which had
included the electric street-car combination hostile to the aspirations
of Emil Stuart), he had wooed and wed one of the prettiest girls in
Benham, and he possessed, not many blocks away, a stately establishment
of his own.  He was accustomed to walk hand in hand with prosperity,
and this habit was reflected in the gay and slightly self-satisfied
quality of his manliness.

After foiling his cousin for a few moments, with a tantalizing smile, a
new idea occurred to him.  He held out the newspaper, saying, "Very
well then, here it is.  I dare you, Lucille, to destroy it.  Nothing
would induce you to part with it."

Lucille snatched the sheet from his hand, and her ruffled hesitation
indicated that to destroy it was the last thing she had intended.  In
another instant she tore the newspaper into strips with an air of
disdain and cast them on the floor.  Delighted at the success of his
taunt, Paul stooped and gathering the fragments began to piece them
together.

"That is only a blind.  She knows she can buy a dozen copies to-morrow.
Listen, Aunt Miriam, to this gem which I have rescued: 'The fair bride
has a complexion of cream of alabaster, with beautiful almond-shaped
eyes, and hair of black lustre, which, rising from her forehead in
queenly bands, seems the natural throne of the glittering diadem in the
picture, one of her choicest bridal gifts.'  Could anything be more
exquisite and fetching?" He gave a laugh which was almost a whoop of
exultation.

"No matter, Lucille," said Mrs. Wilson, coming to her daughter's
rescue.  "It is only envy on Paul's part.  The newspapers did not make
half so much of his wedding."  In her own heart she did not approve of
the publicity, but the sense of importance which it conveyed was not
without its effect even on her.  Besides, the personal description,
though florid in style, was to her maternal eyes not an exaggerated
estimate of her daughter's charms.

"The writer was evidently under the spell of her subject," said Mr.
Prentiss, gallantly.  Though tolerant of banter, especially at clerical
gatherings, and partial to Paul Howard as one of the young men whom he
desired to draw into closer union with the church, the idea of the
possibilities of the newspaper as a dispenser of benefits was still in
his mind, and served to minimize the vanity, if any, of his friend's
daughter.

"Quite naturally, Mr. Prentiss," retorted the tormenting Paul, "for the
subject gave a private audience to the writer only a few days ago."

Paul spoke from the desire to tease, not because he objected actively
to the connivance of his cousin with the designs of the press.  If the
opportunity to do away with the whole practice of prying into and
advertising private social matters had been presented to him, he would
gladly have embraced it, and welcomed at the same time the further
opportunity to tar and feather or duck the race of social reporters.
But as an astute and easy-going American he recognized the prevalence
of the habit, and though personally he tried to dodge with good humor
the impertinent inquiries of press agents, he was not disposed to
censure those who yielded to their importunities.  Indeed, Paul Howard
was so bubbling over with health prosperity, and a generally roseate
conception of life as he saw it, that he shrank from active criticism
of existing social conditions.  He was a strong patriot, and it pleased
him to believe that Americans were world-conquerors and world-teachers.
Hence that it was the part of good Americans to join hands all round
and, avoiding nice strictures, to put their shoulders to the wheel of
progress.

"How absurd you are, Paul," answered Lucille.  "That woman badgered me
with questions, and was positively pathetic into the bargain, for she
confided to me that she hated the whole business, but that her bread
and butter depended on it.  She was certain to write something, and so
rather than have everything wrong, I told her a few things."

"And gave her your photograph in the tiara."

"She asked for it.  She saw it lying on the table.  Wasn't that better
than to be caricatured by some snap-shot with a camera?"

The dire results of what would have ensued had she been less
accommodating seemed so convincing to Lucille as she recited them that
her tone changed from defence to conviction.

"I know a woman," said Clarence Waldo, "who told her servants not to
let any of those newspaper beggars inside the house, and what do you
suppose happened?  On the day of the wedding there appeared an
insulting account of the affair with everything turned topsy-turvy and
disparaging remarks about both families.  It's an awful bore, but when
people of our sort are married the public doesn't like to be kept in
the dark, you know."

"There!  You see!" exclaimed Lucille, triumphantly.

The description of this young lady which her cousin had read was
fundamentally correct.  Her eyes could scarcely be called
almond-shaped, but their curves were more gradual than those of most
American women, a feature which, in conjunction with her thin lips and
thin, pointed nose, gave to her countenance an expression of
fastidiousness, which was characteristic.  She was an example of the
so-called Gibson girl, with a tall and springy, yet slight, figure, and
a race-horse air which suggested both mettle and disdain.  She had been
brought up on the theory of free development--a theory for which not
her mother but the tendency of the day was responsible.  Parents, when
it comes to a choice in educational methods, are apt at heart to
recognize their own personal ignorance, and those with the highest aims
for their offspring are most likely to adopt the newest fashionable
graft on human experience.  We are perpetually on the look-out for
discoveries which will enable our children to become the bright
particular stars which we are not.  So what more natural than that Mrs.
Wilson, with her ardent bent for improving social conditions, should
swallow--hook, bait, and sinker--the theory that the budding
intelligence should be cajoled and humored, not thwarted and coerced?
The idea thus pursued at kindergarten, that everything should be made
easy and agreeable for the infant mind, had been steadily adhered to,
and Lucille could fairly be said to have had her own way all her life.
This own way had been at times bewildering, not to say disheartening,
to her mother.  Mrs. Wilson had expected and yearned for a soulful,
aspiring, poetic daughter with an ambition for culture--herself, but
reincarnated and much improved.  Instead, Lucille had showed herself to
be utterly indifferent to poetry, lukewarm in regard to culture, almost
matter of fact in her mental attitude, and sedulously enamoured of
athletic pursuits.  She had a fancy for dogs.  From fifteen to eighteen
she had followed golf, tennis, and boating, hatless and with her
sleeves rolled up to her elbows, a free and easy and rather mannerless
maiden, Amazon-like in her bearing, but unlike an Amazon in that she
was a jolly companion to the boys, who called her promiscuously by her
Christ